Albert Wenger
THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
CONTENTS
Preface | 7
Introduction | 10
Digital Technology | 15
PART I: LAYING A FOUNDATION | 25
1. Knowledge | 27
2. Optimism | 28
3. Choices | 30
4. Humanism | 34
5. Scarcity | 37
6. History | 39
7. Plan of Attack | 43
PART II: CAPITAL IS SUFFICIENT | 45
8. Needs | 46
9. Population | 53
10. Capital | 56
PART III: ATTENTION IS SCARCE | 67
11. Attention | 68
12. Misallocation | 74
13. Trapped | 76
14. Limits of Capitalism | 84
15. Power of Knowledge | 91
PART IV: ENHANCING FREEDOM | 100
16. Economic Freedom | 103
17. Informational Freedom | 125
18. Psychological Freedom | 154
PART V: TAKING ACTION | 167
19. Growing Mindfulness | 169
20. Fighting the Climate Crisis | 170
21. Defending Democracy | 171
22. Fostering Decentralization | 173
23. Improving Learning | 175
24. Promoting and Living Humanism | 176
Conclusion | 179
Acknowledgments | 186
Appendix | 187
References | 218
PREFACE 7
Preface
As a venture capitalist, I’m often asked: “What’s the next big
thing?” People tend to ask this when they’re looking for a trend
in technology and expect me to tell them about robotics or vir-
tual reality. But that’s a boring interpretation of the question.
These trends come and go as part of hype cycles that repre-
sent the waxing and waning of media interest in a particular
technology. Instead I answer, “Oh, nothing much—just the end
of the Industrial Age.” This momentous change is the subject
of this book.
The World After Capital unabashedly tackles some truly big
subjects. To explain why the Industrial Age is ending and what
is coming next, I will examine such matters as the nature of
technology and what it means to be human. It might seem a
wildly ambitious thesis, but I argue that we are facing a tran-
sition as profound as the one which took humanity from the
Agrarian Age to the Industrial Age, so nothing less than “wildly
ambitious” will do.
The current transition has been made possible by the
advent of digital technology, so it is essential that we under-
stand the nature of this technology and how it differs from
what preceded it. It is also essential that we take a closer look
at the philosophical foundations of what we want to accom-
plish—after all, we have the opportunity to decide what will
follow the Industrial Age. In The World After Capital, I argue
that we are now entering the Knowledge Age, and that to
8 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
get there we must focus on the allocation of attention rather
than capital.
Markets fail at allocating attention because prices cannot
exist for directing our attention to the problems and oppor-
tunities most crucial for the survival and thriving of humanity.
The climate crisis, for instance, is both more severe and more
imminent than most people realize, and it is a direct result
of our failure to pay attention. How quickly we address this
crisis will determine to a great extent the shape of the current
transition. If we do not make drastic changes quickly, getting
to the next age will be even more painful than the transition
to the Industrial Age, which started in the eighteenth century,
involved numerous violent revolutions, and didn’t conclude
until the end of the Second World War.
The transition from the Industrial Age is already underway,
and has caused massive disruption and uncertainty. Many people
fear change, and react by supporting populist politicians who
promote the simplistic message that we should return to the
past. This is happening all over the world: We saw it with the
vote in the 2016 UK referendum to leave the European Union
and with the election of Donald Trump as President of the
United States in the same year. I started writing The World After
Capital before both of those events, but they underline
the importance of a future-oriented narrative that shows a
path forward for humanity. Going back is not a viable option
and never has been. We did not continue foraging for food
after the invention of agriculture, nor did we remain farmers
after the invention of industry (farming is still important, of
course, but it is carried out by a tiny percentage of the popula-
tion). Each of these transitions required us to find new sources
of purpose. As we leave the Industrial Age behind, we can no
longer derive purpose from a job or an ever-growing consump-
tion of material goods. Instead, we need to find a purpose
PREFACE 9
compatible with the Knowledge Age. I feel incredibly fortunate
to have found my purpose in advancing innovation through
investing in startups, as well as in examining why this transi-
tion is happening now and suggesting how we might go about it.
In a strange and wonderful way, much of my life’s work so
far has brought me to this point. As a teenager in my native
Germany in the early 1980s, I fell in love with computers. I
started writing software for companies and then studied eco-
nomics and computer science as an undergraduate at Harvard,
writing my senior thesis on the impact of computerized trad-
ing on stock prices. After graduating, I worked as a consultant
and experienced the impact of information systems on the
automotive, airline, and electric utility industries. As a doctoral
student at MIT, I wrote my dissertation on the impact of
information technology on the organization of companies. As
an entrepreneur, I co-founded an early internet healthcare
company. And as a venture investor, I have had the good for-
tune to back companies that provide transformative digital
technologies and services, including Etsy, MongoDB and Twilio.
You might be wondering why I would choose to write this
book as a VC—after all, surely it’s a distraction from finding
and managing investments in startups? However, working with
startups gives me a window into the future: I get to see trends
and developments before they become widely understood, and
this puts me in a good position to write about what is going
to happen. At the same time, writing about the future that I
would like to see will help me find companies that can help
bring that future about. I have written The World After Capital
because what I see compels me to do so, but I am also confi-
dent that writing it has made me a better investor.
Albert Wenger
10 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Introduction
Humanity is the only species on Earth to have developed
knowledge. I will make the term “knowledge” increasingly pre-
cise as we go along, but for now I will simply say that we are
the only species that is able to read and write, an ability that in
turn has allowed us to create increasingly powerful technology.
Technological advance has the effect of broadening the “space
of the possible”: For instance, with the invention of the air-
plane, human flight became a reality. When the space of the
possible is broadened, it brings with it both good and bad capabilities.
This duality of technology has been with us since we
learned to start a fire, the very first human technology. With
this discovery, it became possible to warm ourselves and cook,
but also to burn down forests and enemy villages.
Today, the internet broadens free access to learning, but it
can also spread hate and lies on a global scale.
And yet there is something special about our time: We are
experiencing a technological non-linearity, in which the space
of the possible expands dramatically, thus rendering predic-
tions based on extrapolation useless. The current non-linear-
ity arises from the extraordinary power of digital technology,
which far exceeds anything that was possible with industrial
machinery, due to two unique characteristics: Digital technology
delivers universality of computation (it can potentially
solve any solvable problem) at zero marginal cost (extra copies
can be produced for free).
INTRODUCTION 11
To understand what is happening, we need to zoom out
in time. Humanity has previously encountered two similar
non-linearities. The first occurred roughly ten thousand years
ago with the invention of agriculture, which ended the Forager
Age and brought us into the Agrarian Age. The second started
with the Enlightenment about four hundred years ago, which
helped usher in the Industrial Age.
Consider foragers one hundred thousand years ago, trying
to predict what society would look like after the invention of
agriculture. Even something that seems as trivially obvious
to us as living in buildings would be hard to imagine from
the viewpoint of migratory tribes. Similarly, much of what
we have today—from modern medicine to computer techno­
logy—would resemble magic to those living as recently
as the mid-twentieth century. Not simply the existence of
smartphones, but also the widespread availability and afford-
ability of such powerful technology, would have been hard
to foresee.
The World After Capital has two goals. The first is to estab-
lish that we are currently experiencing a third period of globally
transformative, non-linear change. The key argument is
that each time the space of the possible expands dramatically,
the defining constraint for humanity shifts—meaning the al-
location problem that most fundamentally needs to be solved
in order to meet humanity’s needs changes. Specifically, the
invention of agriculture shifted scarcity from food to land, and
industrialization shifted scarcity from land to capital (unless
otherwise noted, I will use “capital” to refer to physical capi-
tal, such as machines and buildings). Digital technology is now
shifting scarcity from capital to attention.
Capital is no longer scarce in some parts of the world, and
it is becoming rapidly less scarce everywhere. We should con-
sider this to be the great success of capitalism. But markets,
12 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
which were the crucial allocation mechanism for capital, will
not solve the scarcity of attention. We are bad at allocating at-
tention, both individually and collectively. For example, how
much attention do you pay to your friends and family, or to
the existential question of the meaning of your life? And how
much attention are we paying as humanity to the great chal-
lenges and opportunities of our time, such as the climate crisis
and space travel?
Markets are not able to help us better allocate attention
because prices do not, and cannot, exist for many of the issues
that we should be paying attention to. Consider paying atten-
tion to the task of finding your purpose in life: There is no
supply and demand that will form a “purpose price” for an
individual. It’s ultimately up to you to allocate enough atten-
tion to this existential question.
My second goal in writing The World After Capital is to pro-
pose an approach that will help us overcome the limitations
and remedy the shortcomings of market-based capitalism in
order to facilitate a smooth transition from the Industrial Age
(in which the key scarcity is capital) to the Knowledge Age
(in which the key scarcity is attention). Getting this right
will be critical for humanity, as the two previous transi-
tions were marked by massive turmoil and upheaval. We are
already seeing signs of increasing conflict within societies
and among belief systems across the world, fueling a rise
of populist and nationalist leaders, including Donald Trump
in the US.
How should we approach this third transition? What actions
should society take now, when the non-linearity we are facing
prevents us from being able to make accurate predictions about
the future? We need to enact policies that allow for gradual
social and economic change. The alternative is that we artifi-
cially suppress these changes now, only for them to explode
INTRODUCTION 13
later. In particular, I will argue that we should smooth the
transition to the Knowledge Age by expanding three powerful
individual freedoms:
•
Economic freedom: instituting a universal basic income.
•
Informational freedom: broadening access to information
and computation.
•
Psychological freedom: practicing and encouraging mind-
fulness.
Increasing these three freedoms will make attention less
scarce. Economic freedom will unlock the time that we cur-
rently spend in jobs that can and should be automated. Infor-
mational freedom will accelerate the creation and distribution
of knowledge. And psychological freedom enables rationality
in a world in which we are overloaded with information. Each
of these freedoms is important in its own right, but they are
also mutually reinforcing.
One crucial goal in reducing the scarcity of attention is to
improve the functioning of the “knowledge loop,” which is the
source of all knowledge and which consists of learning, cre-
ating and sharing. Producing more knowledge is essential to
human progress. The history of humanity is littered with failed
civilizations that didn’t produce enough knowledge to over-
come the challenges facing them.
To achieve collective progress through increased individ-
ual freedoms, we must establish a set of values that include
critical inquiry, democracy and responsibility. These values
ensure that the benefits of the knowledge loop accrue broadly
to humanity and extend to other species. They are central
to a renewed humanism, which in turn has an objective basis
in the existence and power of human knowledge. Reassert-
ing humanism is especially critical at a time when we are
14 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
coming close to creating “transhumans” through genetic
engineering and augmentation, as well as “neohumans”
through artificial intelligence.
The World After Capital argues that only this combination
of increased freedoms and strong humanist values will allow
us to safely navigate the transition from the Industrial Age to
the Knowledge Age. Though I am profoundly optimistic about
the ultimate potential for human progress, I am pessimistic
about how we will get there. We seem intent on clinging to
the Industrial Age at all costs, which increases the likelihood
of violent change. My hope is that in writing this book I can in
some small way help move us forward peacefully.
DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 15
Digital Technology
Billions of people all over the world carry around smartphones,
powerful computers that are connected to a global network (the
internet). We often spend many hours a day on these devices,
whether playing games or carrying out work. And yet despite
the growing ubiquity of digital technology, people often find it
difficult to understand what exactly makes it so distinctively
powerful. Some have even derided digital technology, point-
ing to services such as Twitter and arguing that they are incon-
sequential when compared to, say, the invention of vaccines.
It is nonetheless becoming increasingly difficult to ignore
digital technology’s disruptiveness. For example, while many
previously long-established businesses are struggling, including
newspapers and retailers, digital technology compa-
nies such Facebook, Apple, Amazon, Netflix, and Google are
now among the world’s most highly valued (“List of public
corporations,” 2020).
Digital technology turns out to possess two unique character­
istics that explain why it dramatically expands the space
of the possible for humanity, going far beyond anything previ-
ously possible. These are zero marginal cost and the universality
of computation.
16 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
ZERO MARGINAL COST
Once a piece of information exists on the internet, it can be
accessed from anywhere on the network for no additional cost.
And as more and more people around the world connect to the
internet, “anywhere on the network” is increasingly coming to
mean “anywhere in the world.” The servers are already run-
ning, as are the network connections and the end-user devices.
Making one extra digital copy of the information and deliver-
ing it across the network therefore costs nothing. In the lan-
guage of economics, the marginal cost of a digital copy is zero.
That does not mean that people won’t try to charge you for this
information—in many cases they will. But that’s a matter of
price, not of cost.
Zero marginal cost is radically different to anything that
has come before it in the analog world, and it makes some
pretty amazing things possible. To illustrate this, imagine
that you own a pizzeria. You pay rent for your store and your
equipment, and you pay salaries for your staff and yourself.
These are fixed costs, and they don’t change with the number
of pizzas you bake. Variable costs, on the other hand, depend
on the number of pizzas you make. For a pizzeria, these will
include the cost of the water, flour, any other ingredients
you use, any additional workers you need to hire, and the
energy you need to heat your oven. If you make more pizzas,
your variable costs go up, and if you make fewer pizzas,
they go down.
So what is marginal cost? Well, let’s say you are making one
hundred pizzas every day: The marginal cost is the additional
cost of making one more pizza. Assuming the oven is already
hot and has space in it, and your employees aren’t fully occu-
pied, it is the cost of the ingredients, which is likely relatively
low. If the oven had already cooled, then the marginal cost of
DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 17
the additional pizza would include the energy cost required for
reheating the oven and might be quite high.
From a business perspective, you would want to make that
additional pizza as long as you could sell it for more than its
marginal cost. If you had already covered your fixed costs
from the previous pizzas, every cent above marginal cost for
the additional pizza would be profit. Marginal cost also mat-
ters from a social perspective. As long as a customer is willing
to pay more than the marginal cost for that pizza, everyone
is potentially better off—you get an extra contribution toward
your fixed costs or your profits, and your customer gets to eat
a pizza they wanted (note: I am saying “potentially better off”
because people sometimes want things that might not actually
be good for them, such as someone who wants pizza but, as a
result, becomes obese).
Now let’s consider what happens as marginal cost falls from
a high level. Imagine that your key ingredient is an exceedingly
expensive truffle which means that the marginal cost of each of
your pizzas is $1,000. You clearly wouldn’t sell many pizzas, so
you might decide to switch to cheaper ingredients and reduce
your marginal cost to a point where a larger number of custom-
ers are willing to pay more than your marginal cost, so your
sales increase. And as you bring down the marginal cost further
through additional process and product improvements, you
would sell even more pizzas.
Now imagine that through a magical new invention, you
could make additional tasty pizzas at close to zero marginal
cost (say, one cent per additional pizza) and ship them instan-
taneously to anywhere in the world. You would then be able to
sell an exceedingly large number of pizzas. If you charged just
two cents per pizza, you would be making one cent of profit for
every additional pizza you sold. Such low marginal cost might
quickly give you a monopoly on the global pizza market (more
18 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
on this later). Anyone in the world who was hungry and could
afford at least one cent might buy one of your pizzas. The best
price of your pizza from a societal point of view would be one
cent (your marginal cost): The hungry would be fed, and you
would cover your marginal cost. But as a monopolist, you’re
unlikely to set that price. Instead, you would probably engage
in all sorts of problematic behavior aimed at increasing profits,
such as charging more than the marginal cost, trying to prevent
competitors from entering the market, and even looking to get
people addicted to pizza so they will consume ever more.
This is exactly where we stand currently with digital techno­
logy. We can “feed the world” with information: That
additional YouTube video view, additional access to Wikipedia,
or additional traffic report from Waze all have zero marginal
cost. And just as in the case of the hypothetical zero marginal
cost pizza, we are seeing the emergence of digital monopolies,
along with all the problems that entails. (I propose a remedy to
this in Part Four: “Informational Freedom.”)
We are not used to zero marginal cost: most of our exist-
ing economics depends on the assumption that marginal costs
are greater than zero. You can think of zero marginal cost as
an economic singularity similar to dividing by zero—as you
approach it, strange things begin to happen. In addition to
digital near-monopolies, we are already observing power-law
distributions of income and wealth (see Part Three), where
small variations result in hugely different outcomes. Furthermore,
we are now rapidly approaching this zero marginal
cost singularity in many other industries, which are primarily
information based, including finance and education. In sum-
mary, the first characteristic of digital technology that dramat-
ically expands the space of the possible is zero marginal cost.
This can result in digital monopolies, but also has the potential
to grant everyone access to the world’s knowledge.
DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 19
UNIVERSALITY OF COMPUTATION
Zero marginal cost is only one property of digital technology
that dramatically expands the space of the possible; the second
is in some ways even more amazing.
Computers are universal machines; that is, anything that
can be computed in the universe can in principle be computed
by the kind of machines that we already have, given enough
memory and time. We have known this since Alan Turing’s
groundbreaking work on computation in the middle of the last
century. He invented an abstract version of a computer that
we now call a Turing machine, before coming up with a proof
to show that this simple machine could compute anything
(Mullins, 2012; “Church–Turing thesis,” 2020).
By “computation,” I mean any process that takes informa-
tion inputs, executes a series of processing steps, and produces
information outputs. That process is—for better or worse—
also much of what a human brain does: it receives inputs via
nerves, carries out some internal processing, and produces
outputs. In principle, a digital machine can accomplish every
computation that a human brain can. Those brain computa-
tions include something as simple and everyday as recognizing
someone’s face (input: image, output: name) to something as
complicated as diagnosing disease (inputs: symptoms and test
results, output: differential diagnosis).
This “in principle” limitation will turn out to be significant
only if quantum effects matter for the functioning of the brain,
meaning effects that require quantum phenomena such as
entanglement and the superposition of states. This is a hotly
debated topic (Jedlicka, 2017). Quantum effects do not change
what can be computed in principle, as even a Turing machine
can theoretically simulate a quantum effect—but it would take
an impractically long time, potentially millions of years, to do
20 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
so (Timpson, 2004). If quantum effects are important in the
brain, we may need further progress in quantum computing to
replicate some of the brain’s computational capabilities. How-
ever, I believe that quantum effects are unlikely to matter for
the bulk of computations carried out by the human brain, if
they matter at all. We may, of course, one day discover some-
thing new about physical reality that will change our view of
what is computable, but so far this hasn’t happened.
For a long time, this property of universality didn’t mat-
ter much because computers were pretty dumb compared
to humans. This was frustrating to computer scientists who,
since Turing, had believed that it should be possible to build an
intelligent machine, but for decades couldn’t get it to work. Even
something that humans find really simple, such as recognizing
faces, had computers stumped. Now, however, we have com-
puters that can recognize faces, and they get better every day.
An analogy here is the human discovery of heavier-than-
air flight. We knew for a long time that it must be possible—after
all, birds are heavier than air and they can fly—but it took
until 1903, when the Wright brothers built the first successful
airplane, for us to figure out how to do it (“Wright Brothers,”
2020). Once they and several other people had figured it out,
progress was rapid. We went from not knowing how to fly to
crossing the Atlantic in passenger jet planes in fifty-five years:
the British Overseas Airways Corporation’s first transatlan-
tic jet passenger flight was in 1958 (“British Overseas Airways
Corporation,” 2020). If you plot this on a graph, you see a per-
fect example of a non-linearity. We didn’t get gradually better
at flying—we couldn’t do it at all, and then suddenly we could
do it very well.
Digital technology is similar. A series of breakthroughs have
taken us from having essentially no machine intelligence to a
situation where machines can outperform humans on many
DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 21
different tasks, including reading handwriting and recognizing
faces (Neuroscience News, 2018; Phillips et al., 2018). The rate
of machines’ progress in learning how to drive cars is another
great example of the non-linearity of improvement. The
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) held its
first so-called “Grand Challenge” for self-driving cars in 2004.
They picked a 150-mile-long closed course in the Mojave Desert,
and no car got further than seven miles (less than 5 percent of
the course) before getting stuck. By 2012, less than a decade
later, Google’s self-driving cars had driven over 300,000 miles
on public roads, with traffic (Urmson, 2012).
Some people may object that reading handwriting, recogniz-
ing faces, or driving a car is not what we mean by intelligence,
but this just points out that we don’t have a good definition of
it. After all, if you had a pet dog that could perform any of these
tasks, let alone all three, you would call it an intelligent dog.
Other people point out that humans also have creativity
and that these machines won’t be creative even if we grant
them some form of intelligence. However, this amounts to
arguing that creativity is something other than computation.
The word implies something from nothing—outputs without
inputs—but that is not the nature of human creativity. After
all, musicians create new music after hearing lots of music,
Non-Commercial Flight Distance Records
50
40
30
20
10
0
1000 2000
1250 1500 1750
Distance (1000s km)
22 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
engineers create new machines after seeing existing ones,
and so on.
There is now evidence that at least some types of creativity
can be recreated simply through computation. In 2016, Google
achieved a breakthrough in machine intelligence when their
AlphaGo program beat the South Korean Go grandmaster Lee
Sedol by four games to one (Borowiec, 2017). Until that point,
progress with game-playing software had been comparatively
slow and the best programs were unable to beat strong club
players, let alone grandmasters. The number of possible plays
in Go is enormous, far exceeding chess. This means that search-
ing through possible moves and counter-moves from a current
position, which is the approach historically used by chess com-
puters, cannot be used in Go—instead, candidate moves need
to be conjectured. Put differently, playing Go involves creativity.
The approach used for the AlphaGo program started out
by training a neural network on games previously played by
humans. Once the network was good enough, it was improved
further by playing against itself. There has already been prog-
ress in the application of these and related techniques, which
are often referred to as generative adversarial networks (GANs)
to the composition of music and the creation of designs. Even
more surprisingly, it has been shown that machines can
learn to be creative not just by studying prior human games
or designs, but by creating their own, based on rules. Each
of AlphaGo’s two successors, AlphaGo Zero and AlphaZero,
started out knowing only the rules and learned from playing
games against itself (“AlphaZero,” 2020). This approach will
allow machines to be creative in areas where there is limited or
no prior human progress.
While much of what the brain does is computation,
including many tasks that we identify as creative, there is one
function of the brain that may never be accessible to digital
DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 23
machines: having qualia. This is a term from philosophy which
refers to our subjective experience, such as what it “feels like”
to be cold (or hot), to touch an object, be stressed or amazed.
For example, when a digital thermostat displays the room tem-
perature we do not assume that its internal state has anything
remotely resembling our own subjective sensation. The lack of
qualia is obvious in this example, but we assume that it extends
to much more complex situations, such as a self-driving car
taking a series of turns on a winding highway. We would expect
a human driver to experience a sensation of thrill or elation,
but not the car. This lack of qualia in machines may seem like
an aside for the moment, but will turn out to be an important
component of where humans might direct their attention in
the Knowledge Age.
UNIVERSALITY AT ZERO MARGINAL COST
As impressive as zero marginal cost and universality are on
their own, in combination they are truly magical. To take one
example, we are making good progress in the development of
a computer program that will be able to diagnose disease from
a patient’s symptoms in a series of steps, including ordering
tests and interpreting their results (Parkin, 2020). Though we
might have expected this to happen at some point based on the
principle of universality, we are making tangible progress and
should accomplish this in a matter of decades, if not sooner. At
that point, thanks to zero marginal cost, we will be able to pro-
vide low-cost diagnosis to anyone in the world. Let that sink in:
Free medical diagnosis for all humans will soon be in the space
of the possible.
The universality of computation at zero marginal cost is
unlike anything we have had with prior technologies. Being
24 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
able to make all the world’s information and knowledge acces-
sible to all of humanity was never before possible, nor were
intelligent machines. Now we have both. This represents at
least as dramatic and non-linear an increase the ‘space of the
possible’ for humanity as agriculture and industry did before,
and each of those developments ushered in an entirely differ-
ent age. We will be able to think better about what this implies
for the current transition and the next age if we start by laying
a foundation.
DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY 25
PART I:
LAYING A FOUNDATION
With digital technology so fundamentally
expanding what we are able to do, we must
establish some basic principles if we are
to avoid misinterpreting current trends
and phenomena. These principles will
allow us to truly explore this new space of
the possible and the benefits that it might
bring, instead of limiting and bending the
technology to fit our existing economic
and social systems.
What follows is an attempt to estab-
lish a firm foundation for how we might
build a future, grounding it in a clear set
of values. I start with a brief definition
of “knowledge,” a term I use extensively
and somewhat differently from common
usage. I then explain the relationship
between optimism and knowledge, as well
as the importance of choices in shaping
our future. This is followed by a discus-
sion of why the existence of knowledge
26 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
provides an objective basis for human-
ism, which sets it apart from other reli-
gious and philosophical narratives. Much
of my thinking in this area has been in-
fluenced by the writing of David Deutsch,
and in particular his book The Beginning
of Infinity, which explores the history,
philosophy and power of explanations
(Deutsch, 2011).
I will then provide a definition of scar-
city based directly on human needs rather
than on money and prices, using this defi-
nition to show how technology has shifted
scarcity throughout history, leading to
dramatic changes in how we live. From
there, I lay out a plan of attack for the rest
of the book.
KNOWLEDGE 27
1. Knowledge
Knowledge, as I use this term, is the information that humanity
has recorded in a medium, and improved over time. There are
two crucial parts to this definition. The first is “recorded in a
medium,” which allows information to be shared across time
and space. The second is “improved over time,” which sepa-
rates knowledge from mere information.
A conversation that I had years ago but didn’t record cannot
be knowledge in my sense—it isn’t accessible to anyone who
wasn’t there when it happened, and even my own recollec-
tion of it will fade. However, if I write down an insight from
that conversation and publish it on my blog, I have potentially
contributed to human knowledge. The blog post is available to
others across space and time, and some blog posts will turn out
to be important contributions to human knowledge. As another
example, the DNA in our cells isn’t knowledge by my defini-
tion, whereas a recorded genome sequence can be maintained,
shared and analyzed. Gene sequences that turn out to be medi-
cally significant, such as the BRCA mutation that increases the
risk of breast cancer, become part of human knowledge.
My definition of knowledge is intentionally broad, and
includes not just technical and scientific knowledge but art,
music and literature. But it excludes anything that is either
ephemeral or not subject to improvement. Modern computers,
for example, produce tons of recorded information that are not
subsequently analyzed or integrated into any process of pro-
gressive bettering. The reasons for this definition of knowledge
will become clear as I use the term in the following sections
and throughout the book.
28 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
2. Optimism
When I started my blog over a decade ago, I called myself a
“technology optimist.” I wrote:
I am excited to be living [at] a time when we are making tremen-
dous progress on understanding aging, fighting cancer, developing
clean technologies and so much more. This is not to say that I auto-
matically assume that technology by itself will solve all our problems
[…]. Instead, I believe that—over time—we as a society figure out
how to use technology to […] improve our standard of living. I for
one am […] glad I am not living in the Middle Ages.
This book is fundamentally optimistic, which is partly a
reflection of my personality. I can’t see how it would be pos-
sible to be a venture capitalist as a pessimist. You would find
yourself focusing on the reasons why a particular startup
would be unlikely to succeed, and as a result would never
make an investment.
I want to be clear about this apparent bias from the start.
Optimism, however, is much more than a personal bias—it is
essential for human knowledge. Acts of knowledge creation,
such as inventing a new technology or writing a new song, are
profoundly optimistic. They assume that problems can be
solved, and that art will impact the audience (which is true
even for a pessimistic song). Optimism is the attitude that
progress is possible.
Progress has become a loaded term. After all, despite our
technological achievements, aren’t humans also responsi-
ble for the many diseases of civilization, for the extinction of
countless species, and potentially for our own demise through
OPTIMISM 29
climate change? Without a doubt, we have caused tremendous
suffering throughout human history, and we are currently
faced with huge problems including a global pandemic and
the ongoing climate crisis. But what is the alternative to trying
to tackle these?
The beauty of problems is that knowledge can help us
overcome them. Consider the problem of warming ourselves
in the cold. Humans invented ways of making fire, eventually
documented them, and have since dramatically improved the
ways in which we can produce heat. We may take the existence
of knowledge for granted, but no other species has it, which
means whether they can solve a problem depends largely
on luck and circumstance. So not only is optimism essential
for knowledge, but the existence of knowledge is the basis
for optimism.
There is an extreme position that suggests that we would
have been better off if we had never developed knowledge in
the first place (Ablow, 2015). While this may sound absurd,
much of religious eschatology (theology about the “end times”)
and apocalyptic thinking is associated with this position,
asserting that a grand reckoning for the sins of progress is
inevitable. And while they are rare, there have even been voices
welcoming the COVID-19 pandemic and the climate crisis as
harbingers, if not of apocalypse, then at least of a “Great Reset.”
Although there is no guarantee that all future problems
will be solvable through knowledge, one thing is certain:
Assuming that problems cannot be solved guarantees that
they will not be. Pessimism is self-defeating, and apocalyptic
beliefs are self-fulfilling.
All of this is also true for digital technology, which has al-
ready brought with it a new set of problems. We will encounter
many of them in this book, including the huge incentives for
companies such as Facebook to capture as much attention as
30 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
possible, and the conflicts that arise from exposure to content
that runs counter to one’s cultural or religious beliefs. And yet
digital technology also enables amazing progress, such as the
potential for the diagnosis of diseases at zero marginal cost.
The World After Capital is optimistic that we can solve not only
the problems of digital technology, but also that we can apply
digital technology in a way that results in broad progress, including
the knowledge creation needed to address the climate crisis.
3. Choices
Believing in the potential of progress does not mean being a
Pollyanna, and it is important to remember that progress is
not the inevitable result of technology. Contrary to the claims
made by the technology writer Kevin Kelly in his book What
Technology Wants, technology doesn’t want a better world for
humanity; it simply makes such a world possible.
Nor does economics “want” anything: Nothing in economic
theory, for instance, says that a new technology cannot make
people worse off. Economics gives us tools that we can use to
analyze markets and design regulations to address their fail-
ures, but we still need to make choices relating to what we
want markets and regulations to accomplish.
Moreover, contrary to what Karl Marx thought, history also
doesn’t “want” anything. There isn’t a deterministic mech-
anism through which conflicts between labor and capital are
ultimately bound to be resolved in favor of a classless soci-
ety. Nor is there, as the political economist Francis Fukuyama
would have it, an “end of history”—a final social, economic and
CHOICES 31
political system. History doesn’t make its own choices, it is the
result of human choices, and there will be new choices to make,
as long as we continue to make technological progress.
It has always been our responsibility to make choices about
which of the worlds made possible by new technology we want
to live in. Some of these choices need to be made collectively
(requiring rules or regulations), and some of them need to be
made individually (requiring self-regulation). The choices we
are faced with today are especially important because digital
technology so dramatically increases the space of the possible
that it includes the potential for machines that possess knowl-
edge and will eventually want to make choices of their own.
REGULATION
The people building or funding digital technology tend to be
optimists and to believe in progress (though there are also
opportunists thrown into the mix). Many of those optimists
also believe in the need for regulation, while another group has
a decidedly libertarian streak and would prefer governments
not to be involved. For them, regulation and progress conflict.
The debates between these two groups are often acrimonious,
which is unfortunate, because the history of technology clearly
demonstrates both the benefits of good regulation and the
dangers of bad regulation. Our energy is thus better spent on
figuring out the right kind of regulation, as well as engaging in
the processes required to enforce and revise it.
The history of regulating automotive technology is instruc-
tive here. Much of the world currently gets around by driving
cars. The car was an important technological innovation be-
cause it vastly enhanced individual mobility, but its widespread
adoption and large-scale impacts would have been impossible
32 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
without legislation, including massive public investments. We
needed to build roads and to agree on how they should be
used, neither of which could have been accomplished based
solely on individual choices. Roads are an example of a “natu-
ral monopoly.” Multiple disjointed road networks or different
sets of rules would be hugely problematic: Imagine what would
happen if some people drove on the left side of the road and
others drove on the right. Natural monopolies are situations
where markets fail and regulation is required, and social norms
are another form of regulation.
The car would have been less widely adopted as a mode
of individual transport without changes in social norms that
made it acceptable for women to drive, for instance.
Not all regulation is good, of course. In fact, the earli-
est regulation of automotive vehicles was aimed at delaying
their adoption by limiting them to walking speed. In the
United Kingdom they were even required by law in their early
years to be preceded by someone on foot carrying a red flag
(“Red Flag Traffic Laws,” 2020). Similarly, not all regulation
of digital technology will be beneficial. Much of it will initially
aim to protect the status quo and to help established enter-
prises, including the new incumbents. The recent changes to
net neutrality rules are a good example of this (Kang, 2017).
My proposals for regulation, which I will present later in
the book, are aimed at encouraging innovation by giving in-
dividuals more economic freedom and better access to infor-
mation. These regulations, which are choices we need to make
collectively, represent a big departure from the status quo
and from the programs of the established parties here in the
United States and in most other countries. They aim to let us
explore the space of the possible that digital technologies have
created, so we can transition from the Industrial Age to the
Knowledge Age.
CHOICES 33
SELF-REGULATION
Another set of choices has to do with how we react individu-
ally to the massive acceleration of information dissemination
and knowledge creation that digital technology makes possi-
ble. Society cannot impose these rules because they relate to
our inner mental states; they are changes we need to make for
ourselves. For instance, there are many people who feel so of-
fended by content that they encounter on the internet—from
videos on YouTube to comments on Twitter—that they be-
come filled with anxiety, rage, and other painful emotions that
lead to withdraw or lash out, furthering polarization and cycles
of conflict. Other people become trapped in so-called “filter
bubbles” that disseminate algorithmically curated information
that only confirms their existing biases, while others spend all
their time refreshing their Instagram or Facebook feeds. Even
though some regulation can help, as well as more technology,
overcoming these problems will require us to change how we
react to information.
Changing our reactions is possible through self-regulation,
by which I mean training that enhances our capacity to think
critically. From Stoicism in ancient Greece to Eastern religions
such as Hinduism and Buddhism, humans have a long tradition
of practices designed to manage our immediate emotional re-
sponses, enabling us to react to the situations we experience
in insightful and responsible ways. These mindfulness prac-
tices align with what we have learned more recently about the
workings of the human brain and body. If we want to be able to
take full advantage of digital technology, we need to figure out
how to maintain our powers of critical thinking and creativity
in the face of an onslaught of information including deliberate
attempts to exploit our weaknesses.
34 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
4. Humanism
What are the values that I am basing all this on, and where do
they come from? In his book Sapiens, the historian Yuval Noah
Harari claims that all value systems are based on equally valid
subjective narratives. He denies that there is an objective basis
for humanism to support a privileged position for humanity as
a species, but here I will try to convince you that he is wrong
(Harari, 2011). For not only is the power of knowledge a source
of optimism; its very existence provides the basis for human-
ism. By humanism, I mean a system of values that centers on
human agency and responsibility rather than on the divine
or the supernatural, and that embraces the process of critical
inquiry as the central enabler of progress.
Knowledge, as I have already defined it, is the externalized
information that allows humans to share insights with each
other, and includes both scientific and artistic knowledge.
Again, we are the only species on Earth that generates this kind
of knowledge, with the ability to share it over space and time.
I am able to read a book today that someone else wrote a long
time ago and in a completely different part of the world.
This matters a great deal, because knowledge enables fundamentally
different modes of problem-solving and progress.
Humans can select and combine knowledge created by other
humans, allowing small changes to accrete into large bodies of
work over time, which in turn provide the basis for scientific and
artistic breakthroughs. Without knowledge, other species have
only two methods of sharing things they have learned: commu-
nication and evolution. Communication is local and ephem-
eral, and evolution is extremely slow. As a result, animals and
plants routinely encounter problems that they cannot solve,
HUMANISM 35
resulting in disease, death and even extinction. Many of these
problems today are caused by humans (more on that shortly).
Knowledge has given humanity great power. We can fly in
the sky, we can sail the seas, travel fast on land, build large and
durable structures, and so on. The power of our knowledge is
reshaping the Earth. It often does so in ways that solve one
set of problems while creating an entirely new set of problems,
not just for humans but for other species. This is why it is cru-
cial that we remember what the story of Spiderman tells us:
“With great power comes great responsibility.” It is because
of knowledge that humans are responsible for looking after
dolphins, rather than the other way round.
Progress and knowledge are inherently linked through crit-
ical inquiry: We can only make progress if we are capable of
identifying some ideas as better than others. Critical inquiry is
by no means linear—new ideas are not always better than old
ones. Sometimes we go off in the wrong direction. Still, given
enough time, a sorting takes place. For instance, we no longer
believe in the geocentric view of our solar system, and only a
tiny fraction of the art that has ever been created is still consid-
ered important. While this process may take decades or even
centuries, it is blindingly fast compared to biological evolution.
My use of the word “better” implies the existence of univer-
sal values. All of these flow from the recognition of the power
of human knowledge and the responsibility which directly
attaches to that power. And the central value is the process of
critical inquiry itself. We must be vigilant in pointing out flaws
in existing knowledge and proposing alternatives.
After all, imagine how impoverished our music would be if
we had banned all new compositions after Beethoven.
We should thus seek regulation and self-regulation that
supports critical inquiry, in the broad sense of processes that
weed out bad ideas and help better ones propagate. In business
36 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
this often takes the form of market competition, which is why
regulation that supports competitive markets is so important.
Individually, critical inquiry requires us to be open to receiv-
ing feedback in the face of our deeply rooted tendency toward
confirmation bias. In politics and government, critical inquiry
is enabled by the democratic process.
Freedom of speech is not a value in and of itself; rather, it is
a crucial enabler of critical inquiry. But we can see how some
limits on free speech might flow from the same value. If you
can use speech to call for violence against individuals or minority
groups, you can also use it to suppress critical inquiry.
Digital technology, including a global information network
and the general-purpose computing that is bringing machine
intelligence, are dramatically accelerating the rate at which hu-
manity can accumulate and share knowledge. However, these
same technologies also allow targeted manipulation and pro-
paganda on a global scale, as well as constant distraction, both
of which undermine the evaluation and creation of knowledge.
Digital technology thus massively increases the importance of
critical inquiry, which is central to knowledge-based humanism.
Beyond critical inquiry, optimism, and responsibility, other
humanist values are also rooted in the existence of knowledge.
One of these is solidarity. There are nearly eight billion human
beings living on Earth, which exists in an otherwise inhospita-
ble solar system. The big problems that humanity faces, such
as infectious diseases and the climate crisis, require our com-
bined efforts and will impact all of us. We thus need to support
each other irrespective of such differences as gender, race, or
nationality. Whatever our superficial differences may be, we
are much more like each other—because of knowledge—than
we are to any other species.
Once we have established a shared commitment to the
value of solidarity, we can celebrate diversity as another
SCARCITY 37
humanist value. In current political debates, we often pit
individuality against the collective as if it the two conflicted.
However, to modernize John Donne, no human is an island—
we are all part of societies, and of humanity at large. By rec-
ognizing the importance of our common humanity, we create
the basis on which we can unfold as individuals. Solidarity
allows us to celebrate, rather than fear, the diversity of the
human species.
5. Scarcity
Those who are even passingly familiar with economic theory
are likely to understand scarcity in its terms. In that context,
something is scarce if its price is greater than zero. By this defi-
nition, land is scarce—it costs a lot of money to buy a piece
of land. And financial capital is scarce because even with our
current low interest rates, there is a price for borrowing money
or raising equity.
However, there is a fundamental problem with this price-
based definition of scarcity: Anything can be made scarce
by assigning ownership of it. Imagine for a moment that the
world’s atmosphere belonged to Global Air Ltd, a company
which could charge a fee to anyone who breathes air. Air would
suddenly become scarce according to the price-based theory
of scarcity. That might seem like an extreme example, but
some have actually argued that assigning ownership to the
atmosphere would solve the problem of air pollution, on the
grounds that it would result in the air’s owners having an eco-
nomic incentive to maintain an unpolluted atmosphere.
38 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Here, I will use a different meaning of scarcity, one not
based on price. I will call something scarce when there is less
of it than we require to meet our needs. If people are starving
because not enough food has been produced (or made avail-
able), food is scarce. Insofar as more knowledge would allow
this problem to be solved, this can be thought of as technolog-
ical (as opposed to economic) scarcity. The point here is that
technological progress makes things less scarce. As I discuss
in Part Two below, the eighteenth-century scholar Thomas
Malthus (1798) was correct when he predicted that global pop-
ulation growth would be exponential. His prediction, thought,
that such growth would outpace growth in the food supply and
result in ongoing shortages and mass starvation turned out to
be wrong, because technological progress resulted in exponen-
tial increases in food production. In fact, recent advances in
agricultural techniques have meant that the amount of land
needed for food production is now declining, even as food pro-
duction is continuing to grow rapidly.
But is it possible to draw a clear distinction between needs
and wants? If people are not starving but want more or differ-
ent food, can food still be scarce? Modern economics equates
the two, but intuitively we know that this is not the case. We
need to drink water, but want to drink champagne. We need to
provide our body with calories, but want to eat caviar. These
examples are obviously extreme, but the point is that many dif-
ferent foods can be used to meet the need for calories. Desiring
a particular food is a want, while getting enough calories (and
other nutrients) is a need. In Part Two, I set out a list of the
needs and look at our current and future ability to fulfill them.
Importantly, if something is no longer scarce, it isn’t nec-
essarily abundant—there is an intermediate stage, which I will
call “sufficiency.” For instance, there is sufficient land on the
planet to meet everyone’s needs, but building housing and
HISTORY 39
growing food still require significant physical resources, which
is why these things are not abundant. I can foresee a time when
technological progress makes land and food abundant—imag-
ine how much space we would have if we could figure out how
to live on other planets. Digital information is already on a
clear path to abundance: We can make copies of it and distrib-
ute them at zero marginal cost, thus meeting the information
needs of everyone connected to the internet.
With this needs-based definition of scarcity in place, we
can now examine how technology has shifted the constraining
scarcity for humanity over time.
6. History
I will now provide a highly abstract account of human history
that focuses on how technology has shifted scarcity over time
and how those shifts have contributed to dramatic changes in
human societies.
Homo sapiens emerged roughly two hundred and fifty thou-
sand years ago. Over most of the time since, humans were
foragers (also referred to as hunter-gatherers). During the
Forager Age, the defining scarcity was food. Tribes either found
enough food in their territory, migrated, or starved.
Then, roughly ten thousand years ago, humanity came up
with a series of technologies that together we recognize today
as agriculture, such as the planting of seeds, irrigation, and
the domestication of animals. These technologies shifted the
scarcity from food to land in what became the Agrarian Age.
A society that had enough arable land (that is, land on which
40 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
food can be grown) could meet its needs and flourish. It could,
in fact, create a food surplus that allowed for the existence of
groups such as artists and soldiers that were not directly involved
in food production.
More recently, beginning about four hundred years ago with
the Enlightenment, humanity invented a new series of technol-
ogies, including steam power, mechanical machines, chemis-
try, mining, and eventually technologies to produce, transmit
and harness electricity. Collectively, we refer to these today
as the Industrial Revolution, and the age that followed as the
Industrial Age. Once again, the scarcity shifted, this time away
from food and toward capital such as buildings, machinery and
roads. Capital was scarce because we couldn’t meet the needs
of a growing human population, including the need for calories,
without building agricultural machines, producing fertilizer
and constructing housing.
In each of those two prior transitions, the way humanity
lived changed radically. In the transition from the Forager Age
to the Agrarian Age we went from being nomadic to seden-
tary, from flat tribal societies to extremely hierarchical feudal
societies, from promiscuity to monogamy (sort of), and from
animistic religions to theistic ones. In the transition from
the Agrarian Age, to the Industrial Age, we went from living
in the country to living in the city, from large extended fam-
ilies to nuclear families or no family at all, from commons
to private property (including private intellectual property)
and from great-chain-of-being theologies to the Protestant
work ethic.
What accounts for these changes? In each transition the
nature of the scarcity changed in a way that made measure-
ment of human effort more difficult, which in turn required
more sophisticated ways of providing incentives to sustain the
necessary level of effort.
HISTORY 41
In the Forager Age, when the key scarcity was food, the
measurement and incentive problem was almost trivial: every-
one in a tribe sees how much food the hunters and gatherers
bring back, and it is either enough to feed everyone or not. In
so-called “immediate return societies” (which had no storage),
that is literally all there is to it. With storage, the story gets
slightly more complicated, but not by much. I believe that this
explains many of the features of successful foraging tribal so-
cieties, including the flat hierarchy and the equality of sharing.
In the Agrarian Age, when the scarcity was land, the mea-
surement problem got significantly harder: You can really
only tell at harvest time (once per year in many regions of the
world) how well-off a society will be. Again, I believe that this
explains many of the features of successful agrarian societies,
in particular the need for a lot of structure and strict rules.
It is crucial to keep in mind that these societies were essen-
tially pre-scientific, so they had to find out what works by trial
and error. When they found a rule that seemed to work, they
wanted to stick with it and codify it (much of this happened via
the theistic religions).
In the Industrial Age, when the scarcity was capital, the
measurement problem became even harder. How do you
decide where a factory should be built and what it should pro-
duce? It might take years of process and product innovation to
put physical capital together that is truly productive. I believe
that this explains much of the success of the market-based
model, especially when contrasted with planned economies.
Effectively, the solution to the incentive problem moved from
static rules to a dynamic process that allows for many experi-
ments to take place and only a few of them to succeed.
These changes in how humanity lives were responses to
an increasingly difficult measurement problem, as technolog-
ical progress shifted scarcity from food to land and then from
42 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
land to capital. But the transitions don’t occur deterministically;
they are the result of human choice driving changes
in regulation.
For example, when it came to the scarcity of capital, humanity
tried out radically different approaches between market-
based and planned economies. As it turned out, competitive
markets, combined with entrepreneurialism and the strategic
deployment of state support (e.g. in the form of regulation),
were better at allocating and accumulating capital. Similarly,
the Agrarian Age contained vastly different societies, including
the Athenian democracy, which was hugely advanced compared
to much of Northern European society in the Middle Ages.
The other important point to note about the previous tran-
sitions is that they took quite some time and were incredibly
violent. Agriculture emerged over the span of thousands of
years, during which time agrarian societies slowly expanded,
either subduing or killing foraging tribes. The transition from
the Agrarian Age to the Industrial Age played out over several
hundred years and involved many bloody revolutions and ultimately
two world wars. At the end of the Agrarian Age, the
ruling elites had gained their power from controlling land and
still believed it to be the critical scarcity. For them, industry
was a means of building and equipping increasingly powerful
armies with tanks and battleships to ensure control over land.
Even the Second World War was about land, as Hitler pursued
Lebensraum (literally “room to live”) for his Third Reich. It
was only after the Second World War that we finally left the
Agrarian Age behind for good.
Now, once again, we find ourselves in a transition period
as digital technology shifts the scarcity from capital to atten-
tion. What should be clear by now is that this transition will
also require dramatic changes in how humanity lives, just as
the two prior transitions did. It is also likely that the transition
PLAN OF ATTACK 43
will play itself out over several generations, instead of being
accomplished quickly.
Finally, there is a historic similarity to the transition out of
the Agrarian Age that explains why many governments have
been focused on incremental changes. To understand, we
should first note that capital today is frequently thought of as
monetary wealth or financial capital, even though it is produc-
tive capital (machines, buildings, and infrastructure) that really
matters. Financial capital allows for the formation of physical
capital, but it does not directly add to the production of goods
and services. Companies only require financial capital because
they have to pay for machines, supplies, and labor before they
receive payment for the product or service they provide.
Just as the ruling elites at the end of the Agrarian Age came
from land, the ruling elites today come from capital. They
often don’t take up political roles themselves but rather have
ways of influencing policy indirectly, exposing them to less per-
sonal risk. A good recent example is the role of the billionaire
hedge fund manager Robert Mercer and his family in support-
ing groups that influenced the outcome of the US presiden-
tial election in 2016, such as the right-wing news organization
Breitbart (Gold, 2017).
7. Plan of Attack
My first major claim is that capital, at least in the technological
sense, is no longer scarce. We have sufficient productive capital
to meet our needs through growing food, constructing build-
ings, producing clothes, and so on. To establish this, I will start
44 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
by setting out a catalog of individual and collective needs. I will
then examine current population trends to see what we can
learn about the future growth in these needs, followed by an
evaluation of our available capital and its ability to meet those
needs. That entire section of The World After Capital shows that
physical capital is sufficient in aggregate. It does not address
questions of wealth distribution; those will be discussed later.
My second claim is that attention is now the key scarcity,
meaning that our present allocation of attention is resulting in
humanity’s needs not being met. To establish this I will start
by pinning down more precisely what attention is and present-
ing several examples of human needs that either are already
no longer met, such as the need for meaning, or that are at
risk of not being met in the future, such as calories due to the
climate crisis—all due to a lack of attention. After that I will
consider how much human attention is currently caught up
in Industrial Age activities, and how more attention is being
trapped through the dominant uses of digital technology, such
as advertising-based social networks. I will also discuss why
market-based capitalism cannot be used to allocate attention.
I will then make concrete suggestions for how to facilitate
the transition to the next age, which I call the Knowledge Age.
In keeping with the ideas about knowledge and humanism that
I presented earlier, my suggestions focus on increasing free-
doms as the basis for more available attention and improved
allocation of that attention.
PLAN OF ATTACK 45
PART II:
CAPITAL IS SUFFICIENT
In saying that capital is sufficient, I mean
that there is enough of it to meet our
needs. That’s what I set out to show in this
part of the book. The only way to do so is
by examining what those needs are and
separating them clearly from our unlim-
ited wants. We must then consider population
trends so we can see how many
humans are likely to have those needs in
the future. Only then can we attempt to
determine whether our existing capital is
sufficient to meet them.
46 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
8. Needs
The definition of scarcity introduced in Part One is based on
the idea of needs, so to argue that we are currently experienc-
ing a shift to attention being the new scarcity requires me to
demonstrate that we have sufficient capital for meeting our
needs. But agreeing on what constitutes human needs is not
a simple task. What follows should be seen as a step along
the way. A list of needs is the type of externalized human
knowledge that can be improved over time through the pro-
cess of critical inquiry.
In an early draft of The World After Capital, I grouped needs
into categories such as biological, physical, and social, but the
boundaries between them seemed rather arbitrary. So instead
I distinguish here between individual and collective needs,
where the former apply to a single person and the latter are
the needs of humanity. Another challenge in putting together
such a list is that it is easy to confuse a need with a strategy for
meeting it. For instance, eating meat is a strategy for address-
ing our need for calories, but humans can, of course, acquire
calories from many sources.
INDIVIDUAL NEEDS
These are the basic needs of the human body and mind, with-
out which individual survival is impossible. A single individ-
ual has these needs even when they are completely isolated,
such as if they are traveling alone in a spaceship. The first set
of individual needs relates to keeping our bodies powered.
These include:
NEEDS 47
Oxygen. On average, humans need about 550 liters of oxygen
every day, depending on the size of our body and physical exer-
tion. Our most common way of meeting this need is breathing
air (“How Much Oxygen Does a Person Consume in a Day?”
2000). Although that may sound obvious, we have developed
other solutions through technology—for example, the blood
of patients struggling to breathe can be oxygenated externally.
Water. We need to ingest two to three liters of water per day
to stay hydrated, depending on factors such as body size, exer-
tion, and temperature (“Water: How Much Should You Drink
Every Day?” 2020). In addition to drinking water and fluids
that contain it, we have other solutions for this, such as the
water contained in the foods that we eat.
Calories. To power our bodies, adults need between 1,500
and 3,200 calories per day, a need we mainly meet by eating
and drinking (U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services, 2015). The best way to
obtain calories, however, is surprisingly poorly understood—
the mix between proteins, lipids, and carbohydrates is subject
to debate.
Nutrients. The body cannot synthesize all the materials it
requires, including certain amino acids, vitamins and miner-
als—these must be obtained as part of our nutrition. This is
another area that is surprisingly poorly understood, meaning
there is little consensus regarding the mix of nutrients we need
to take in.
Discharge. We also need to get things out of our bodies
by expelling processed food, radiating heat, and exhaling
carbon dioxide. Humans have made a great deal of progress
48 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
around meeting our discharge needs, such as toilets and
public sanitation.
The second set of individual needs relates to the operating
environment for humans. From a cosmic perspective, humans
have an incredibly narrow operating range. Even here on Earth
we can live without technological assistance only in relatively
few places. Here are some of our basic operating needs:
Temperature. Our bodies can self-regulate their temperature,
but only within a limited range of environmental tempera-
ture and humidity. Humans can easily freeze to death or die of
overheating (we cool our bodies through sweating, also known
as “evaporative cooling,” which stops working when the air
gets too hot and humid). We therefore often need to help our
bodies with temperature regulation by controlling our envi-
ronment. Common strategies to meet our temperature needs
include clothing, shelter, heating and air conditioning.
Pressure. Anybody who has gone diving will be aware that our
bodies do not handle increased pressure very well. The same
goes for decreased pressure, which is one of the reasons why
we find air travel exhausting (airplane cabins maintain pressure
similar to being at the top of an eight-thousand-foot mountain).
Light. Most humans would be hard-pressed to achieve much
in complete darkness. For a long time, our need for light was
met mainly by sunlight, but much human ingenuity has gone
into the creation of artificial light sources.
The third set of individual needs arises from how we deal with
a complex and ever-changing environment. As we go through
life, we all encounter challenges that we need to overcome,
resulting in three fundamental individual needs:
NEEDS 49
Healing. Whenever we damage our body, it needs to heal.
The human body comes equipped with extensive systems for
self-healing, but beyond a certain range it needs external assistance.
We have developed many solutions, which are often
grouped under the term “healthcare”.
Learning. When we are born, we are quite incompetent—
we have to learn basic skills, such as walking and how to use
even the simplest tools. When we encounter a new situation,
we have to learn how to deal with it. We group many of the
strategies for meeting the need for learning under the heading
“education,” but other solutions include experimenting to gain
experience, self-study and parenting.
Meaning. As humans, we have a profound psychological need
for meaning in our lives. One solution is to have a purpose.
Religious belief and belonging to a community have long been
a source of purpose for humans. Another key strategy comes
from our interactions with other humans, including having
other people acknowledge our contributions to a project, or
even merely recognize our existence.
This last set of needs may strike you as being at a much higher
level than the earlier ones. The idea of sorting individual
needs into a hierarchy, as the psychologist Abraham Maslow
famously did, is intuitively appealing, but it is misleading—all
of these needs are vital. For example, Maslow put needs like
calories at the bottom and needs like meaning at the top, im-
plying that calories are more foundational than meaning. But
we know from the work of Viktor Frankl and others that mean-
ing is essential to human effort and that accessing calories re-
quires effort. As a thought exercise, picture yourself alone in
a spaceship and try to remove any of the above. You’ll soon
realize that they are all equally important.
50 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
COLLECTIVE NEEDS
Our collective needs arise from living together in societies
and sharing space and resources. Meeting them is what allows
human societies to survive and advance.
Reproduction. Individuals can survive without sex, but repro-
duction is a need for societies as a whole. We have learned how
to reproduce without sex; in the future, there may be different
solutions for the continuation of a human society—whether
here on Earth or elsewhere.
Allocation. Access to physical resources has to be allocated.
Take a chair as an example. Only one person can comfortably
sit in it at a time—when there are multiple people, we need a
way of allocating the chair between them. If you are by yourself,
you can sit on a chair whenever you want to—allocation is a
collective need.
Motivation. This may seem like an individual need, but it acts
as a collective one in the sense that societies must motivate
their members to carry out important tasks and follow rules.
Even the smallest and least technologically advanced societies
have solutions for this problem, often in the form of rewards
and punishments.
Coordination. Whenever more than a single human is involved
in any activity, coordination is needed. Take a simple meet-
ing between two people as an example. In order for it to take
place, the two need to show up at the same place at the same
time. We have developed many communication and gover-
nance mechanisms to address this need.
NEEDS 51
Knowledge. As I argued in earlier sections on optimism and
humanism, knowledge is the central collective human need:
Without it, a society will encounter problems that it cannot
solve. History is full of examples of societies that lacked suf-
ficient knowledge to sustain themselves, such as the Easter
Islanders and the Mayans. This is not about what any one
individual has learned, but about the body of knowledge that
is accessible to society as a whole. Later in this book we will
examine solutions for generating more knowledge, faster.
These collective needs may strike you as abstract, but this is
the result of identifying needs rather than solutions, which are
much more concrete and readily recognizable. For instance,
governments and laws are examples of solutions to collective
needs such as allocation and coordination, as are markets and
firms and, more recently, networks and platforms. In other
words, many of the institutions of society exist because they
help us solve a collective need.
ENABLERS
Some things don’t meet specific needs in themselves, but in-
stead enable different solutions. Consider energy, for example.
You may well ask: Isn’t it something we all need, both individu-
ally and collectively? For instance, individually we need energy
to maintain the temperature of a house, and collectively we
need energy to power our communications infrastructure. As
these two examples show, energy itself does not meet needs—
rather, it makes possible something that does. It is what I call
an enabler.
Here are four foundational enablers:
52 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Energy. For a long time, humans relied on direct sunlight as
their primary energy source. Since then we have developed
many ways of generating energy, including better ways of cap-
turing sunlight. Capturing more energy and making it available
in a highly concentrated and easily controllable form via elec-
tricity has enabled new solutions to human needs.
Resources. In early human history, all resources were drawn
directly from our natural surroundings. Later, we started grow-
ing and extracting resources using progressively more techno­
logy. Many modern solutions have been made possible by
access to new kinds of resources. For instance, mobile phones,
which provide new solutions to individual and collective needs,
are made possible in part by esoteric raw materials, including
the so-called “rare-earth elements.”
Transformation. Energy and resources alone are not enough.
To enable most solutions, we need to figure out (and remem-
ber!) how to use the former to transform the latter. This involves
chemical and physical processes. Physical capital, in the
shape of machines, has been a crucial enabler of many new
solutions to human needs. For instance, a knitting machine
can quickly transform yarn into clothing, one of our key solu-
tions for maintaining the human operating environment.
Transportation. The final foundational enabler is the ability
to move stuff, including people. This is another area in which
we have made great progress, going from human-powered to
animal-powered to machine-powered transportation.
As in the case of needs, I have deliberately chosen enablers
that have a high degree of abstraction. Coal-fired power plants
provide energy, as do solar panels—and nuclear fusion will do
POPULATION 53
the same at some point in the future. These three examples
have dramatically different characteristics, but they are all
energy enablers.
While I expect further changes, I believe that my current
version of needs and enablers satisfies my argument that there
is sufficient productive capital in the world. To establish this in
more quantitative terms, though, we need to consider the size
and growth of the human population.
9. Population
When Thomas Malthus predicted that exponential population
growth would outpace humanity’s ability to grow food and lead
to widespread famine, he was half-right: The global population
did explode at the start of the nineteenth century.
Since then, the human population has grown from about
1 billion to nearly 8 billion people (“World Population Clock:
7.9 Billion People”, 2021). However, Malthus’s dire warnings
about the consequences of this population growth have proven
wrong. There has been no global-scale starvation, and most
people do not live in abject poverty. In fact, the number of peo-
ple living in extreme poverty around the world has declined,
even though population growth has been about twice as fast as
Malthus’s predicted upper limit of 1 billion people added over
25 years (Roser & Ortiz-Ospina, 2013).
What Malthus got wrong was the rate of technological prog-
ress. First, he was pessimistic about our ability to improve agricultural
productivity. Since his writing, there have been huge
advances in agriculture: the percentage of the global workforce
54 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
employed in the sector has declined from more than 80 per-
cent to 33 percent, and is falling rapidly (in the US and other
advanced economies, agriculture represents 2 percent of em-
ployment or less). In the last 50 years alone, the land required
to produce a given quantity of food has declined by 68 percent
(Ritchie & Roser, 2019). The total amount of land used to pro-
duce food has still continued to grow at least until recently, but
much more slowly than the population (Ausubel et al., 2013;
Ewers et al., 2009).
Second, Malthus could not have foreseen the scientific
breakthroughs that enabled the Industrial Revolution. That
revolution not only powered the increase in agricultural
productivity, but also gave us dramatic advances in living stan-
dards, including increased life expectancy, faster transporta-
tion, and cheaper communication.
This matters because, as it turns out, population growth
responds to progress. In particular, there is a strong and well-
documented relationship between levels of infant mortality,
living standards, and birth rates. As better medical technology
reduces infant mortality and better production technology
increases living standards, birth rates decline. This is not a
mechanistic relationship, but involves complex social adjust-
World Natural Population Growth (per 1,000)
GDP per capita, PPP (Current int’l $)
$20k
$15k
$10k
$5k
$0k
Child mortality (per 1,000 live births)
17 16 15 14 13 12 11
100
75
50
25
0
Source: World Bank, 2020a; 2020b; United Nations, 2019
POPULATION 55
ments, such as women entering the workforce and other forms
of empowerment for women (e.g., better access to education).
Max Roser and the team at the “Our World In Data” project
have produced some beautiful charts that show how this effect
of progress on birth rates has occurred all around the world
(Roser, 2019a; Roser & Ritchie, 2013).
So despite the extraordinary growth in global population
over the last 200 years, simply assuming that it will continue
into the future would be a mistake: There are strong signs that
the world’s population is likely to peak. Some people claim
that this debate is crucial because they don’t think the world
can sustain, say, eleven billion people. However, this argument
misses a key point. The world cannot sustain its current popu-
lation of nearly eight billion people either, unless we continue
to make technological progress. The ways we have managed to
supply eight billion people so far have created all sorts of new
problems, such as water and air pollution and, most pressingly,
the climate crisis.
In fact, Malthus’s predictions may yet catch up with us. For
example, if we don’t rapidly address the climate crisis, we may
experience large-scale crop failure resulting in mass starvation.
This would be an example of having insufficient technology for
producing enough food, in contrast to many past examples of
mass starvation, such as in India, that were the result of social
and political breakdowns from internal strife or external inter-
ference disrupting food production or distribution.
Still, the key takeaway should be that needs will not con-
tinue to grow exponentially because A) population growth will
slow down, and B) needs per person are limited. All the signs
suggest that the global population curve is starting to decel-
erate, whereas the rate of technical progress is continuing to
accelerate (Roser, 2019; Roser & Ritchie, 2013). Knowing these
things, we can be optimistic about progress in relationship to
56 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
population growth. In other words, Malthus will ultimately
turn out to have been wrong both about the rate of technologi-
cal progress and the long-term rate of population growth.
I have already described why digital technology is so disrup-
tive. We will see in more detail later how it is contributing to
an acceleration of knowledge creation, and thus progress.
10. Capital
As implied by the title of this book, one of my fundamental
claims is that there is enough capital in the world to meet
everyone’s needs. That means meeting the individual needs of
at least 7.9 billion people, as well as the collective needs of the
societies they live in. If there is plenty of slack today, capital
will no longer be the binding constraint for humanity going
forward, as population growth is decelerating while technolog-
ical progress is accelerating.
It is tempting to look at this in terms of financial capital, but
that would be giving in to the illusion of money. Dollar bills
don’t feed people and gold bars can’t be used as smartphones.
The capital that fundamentally matters is productive physical
capital, such as machines and buildings.
Of course, financial capital is not irrelevant—it is required
for the initial construction of physical capital and to meet the
ongoing needs of economic activity. If I want to build a factory
or a store, I need to pay the construction workers and the sup-
pliers of machines before I can start making money. And many
businesses have ongoing expenses to pay each month before
they can collect revenues from customers. When cash outflows
CAPITAL 57
precede cash inflows, a financing mechanism is required. To
accumulate physical capital, we need to be able to accumulate
financial capital.
The history of financial capital has seen many important
innovations, and the introduction of marketplace lending has
been an important recent one. The allocation of financial cap-
ital to projects through markets has been enormously success-
ful, and it is the success of the market-based approach that has
given us a large enough physical capital base to meet our basic
needs. I should be quick to point out, as I have done elsewhere
in the book, that the market-based approach relies on plenty of
governmental activity, such as pro-competition regulation and
the funding of education and research.
Many recent innovations in finance, however, rather than
contributing to the creation and allocation of physical capital,
have had the opposite effect, instead leading to the excessive
“financialization” of the economy. This refers to growth in
financial activities that help generate personal wealth for some
but that are decoupled from, or even harm, the formation of
physical capital. One example of excess financialization is
companies borrowing money to buy back shares instead of
investing in innovation. The derivatives and structured securi-
ties, such as collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), that pow-
ered the housing bubble are another example. This is not to
say that there are no potentially legitimate uses of these tools—
they have simply grown far beyond what is needed for physical
capital formation and taken on a life of their own. This can be
seen both in the increased size of the financial sector as a pro-
portion of the overall economy and in the wealth generated by
making money from money instead of from productive capital
(Lahart, 2011; Lewis, 2018).
What is the role of “human capital” in all of this? I find this
relatively new term to be a fundamental misnomer. Humans
58 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
provide labor, and machines are capital. We saw earlier that, as
Malthus had predicted, there was an exponential population
explosion. As a result, labor has not been a constraint on meet-
ing our needs. That does not mean that we have not had labor
shortages from time to time, but these have largely been the
result of policy choices, such as restrictions on immigration or
discriminatory access to education, rather than reflecting fun-
damentally scarce labor.
The better question to ask is: What is the role of knowledge?
The answer is that advances in knowledge are essential for
making capital more effective. Even more fundamentally, physi­
cal capital cannot exist in the first place without knowledge.
Take a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanner, for
example: You can’t build one without a great deal of knowledge
of physics and engineering. However, in a world where every-
one’s needs are taken care of, it might be possible to build the
same machine without the need for financial capital, as you
might not have to pay people in advance. And with enough
knowledge, in the form of advanced robots, it will even be pos-
sible to build one without any human capital—labor—at all.
In conclusion here, we should realize that the accumulation
of financial capital does not contribute to meeting our needs
in and of itself. Imagine a Spanish galleon full of gold caught
in a storm. Although the sailors aboard had ample access to
financial capital, what they really needed to survive was either
more knowledge or better physical capital. For example, if they
had more knowledge of the weather, they could have circum-
navigated the storm. Or if they had a stronger boat, they could
have simply ridden it out. If anything, the gold is a hindrance
to their survival—throwing it overboard might help the boat
get away from the storm more quickly.
We will now examine whether physical capital is sufficient
to meet our needs.
CAPITAL 59
INDIVIDUAL NEEDS
My claim is that capital is no longer the binding constraint
on our ability to meet our individual needs. This is especially
true for the developed economies, but it is increasingly true
globally. Let’s start by considering the needs emanating from
keeping our bodies powered (see the Appendix for additional
supporting information).
Oxygen. There’s plenty of air for us to breathe; the key chal-
lenge is to make sure it is clean and safely breathable. China
and India are both currently struggling with this, but they de-
veloped rapidly and are reliant on outdated energy sources.
What is needed here are improvements to capital, such as
switching from cars powered by internal combustion engines
to electric vehicles.
Water. There’s plenty of water for everyone in the world to
drink (the oceans are full of it). Though there are distribution
and access problems, including in the United States (for ex-
ample, the crisis of polluted drinking water in Flint, Michigan),
physical capital is not a binding constraint. We are even able to
build new desalination plants in record time.
Calories. We have made dramatic progress in farming: As
a result of increased productivity, the rate of increase in the
amount of land used globally to produce has plummeted, and
the amount of land used worldwide for agriculture may have
already peaked (Ramankutty et al., 2018; Ausubel et al., 2013).
There have been significant recent breakthroughs in vertical
farming, the practice of growing plants under controlled condi-
tions, as well as in automated farming. For instance, one of the
world’s largest vertical farms operates in Jersey City, and the
60 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Japanese indoor farming company Spread’s automated facility
can produce 30,000 heads of lettuce per day (Harding, 2020).
Nutrients. This is primarily a question of knowledge, as we
still don’t fully understand which nutrients the body really
needs to ingest in what quantities. We obtain most of them
from food, but depending on our diet, we may need to add
some supplements. The remaining amounts tend to be small,
and we can produce plenty of them already (in developed
countries, entire industries have sprung up trying to con-
vince people to buy and consume food supplements that they
do not need).
Discharge. This is primarily addressed through modern
sewage technology. Here too, capital is no longer a binding
constraint, though its uneven distribution around the world
is a problem.
Now let’s consider the needs relating to the operating environ-
ment for humans.
Temperature. The Chinese construction boom illustrated
how quickly we can build shelter, which, together with heating
and air conditioning, is one crucial solution to our tempera-
ture needs. The US, too, had a construction boom facilitated by
artificially cheap mortgage credit in the early 2000s. Though a
lot of housing was built speculatively and remained empty, it
powerfully demonstrated our construction capacity.
Clothing is another strategy for meeting our temperature
needs. The price of clothing has been falling in many parts of
the world, including the United States. Capital is not a con-
straint here—indeed, we have the ability to clothe the world’s
population many times over.
CAPITAL 61
Pressure. Thankfully, we have nothing to do here, as we have
plenty of space for humans to live in the right pressure range.
This is a great example of a need that we do not consider much
at all, but that would loom very large if land were to cease to be
habitable and we had to go underwater or into space.
Light. We have become very good at providing light. One study
shows how the hours of light provided by 60 hours of labor
in the United States exploded from around 10 in 1800 to over
100,000 by 1990 (Harford, 2017; Nordhaus, 1994). Since then,
we have made considerable further progress with LED lighting.
That progress has also come to other parts of the world, for
instance in the form of off-grid, solar-powered lamps.
Finally we come to the more abstract individual needs.
Healing. We often read that healthcare consumes an increas-
ingly large fraction of the economy, especially in the United
States, but that does not imply that capital is scarce. Indus-
trialized countries have plenty of hospital space and doctor’s
offices. But, you may ask, didn’t the COVID-19 pandemic
show that we didn’t have enough ICU beds? The answer is no:
Countries that reacted to the virus in good time stayed well
within their capacity.
Overall, capital is sufficient for healing. We have extensive
diagnostic facilities and are able to produce large quantities of
medicine.
Learning. Nor are we constrained by capital when it comes
to learning. This is increasingly true not just in industrialized
nations, but also globally due to the expansion of wireless
networks and the increasing affordability of smartphones. We
are not far away from reaching a point where we have enough
62 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
capital for anyone in the world to learn anything that can be
transmitted over the internet; the binding constraint is the
availability of affordable content and the time it takes to learn
and teach.
Meaning. The final individual need, that of meaning, is not
and has never been constrained by capital. Capital plays no
role in meeting our need for it.
COLLECTIVE NEEDS
It might seem difficult at first to see how capital relates to our
collective needs. What could it possibly have to do with such
abstract concepts as motivation and coordination? In discuss-
ing why capital is sufficient today to meet our collective needs,
I will also briefly point out how it was scarce with regard to
these needs in the past.
Reproduction. Available capital has always been sufficient for
reproduction—otherwise, we wouldn’t be here today.
Allocation. During the Industrial Age, the allocation of capital,
such as where to build a factory and what it should produce,
was the central allocation problem, and it was the scarcity of
capital that made it difficult to meet this need. When there
were few roads and other means of transportation, there were
few places a factory could be built. Getting the place just right
and building the right factory was thus a much harder problem
than today where we can ship products around the world. As
a result, the allocation problem for capital is no longer con-
strained by capital. And because capital is no longer scarce, it
is also no longer the dominant allocation problem. As we will
CAPITAL 63
see in the next section, it has been replaced by the allocation of
attention, for which capital is largely irrelevant.
Motivation. Again, it might at first seem as if capital never
played a role here. But consider what it was like to work in an
early factory, when the outputs were generally not affordable
for the workers. Workers at the time had to more or less be
forced into factory work, a situation that still persists in some
parts of the world for certain industries (e.g., clothing and
hardware assembly). Contrast this with much of the period
following the Second World War, when more advanced econo-
mies already had a fair bit of capital, making possible the mass
production of goods that workers could afford. Motivation
can of course come from many sources other than what wages
can buy, such as wanting to help others (e.g. in healthcare)
or facing an enemy (e.g. wartime production). The key point
is that today, motivation is no longer constrained by capital
in principle.
Coordination. One of the primary ways to meet the need for
coordination is through communication, which was heavily
constrained by capital for the longest time. Today, however, we
can hold a real-time video conference with nearly anybody in
the world. And some of the big coverage gaps, such as parts of
Africa, are rapidly being filled in.
Knowledge. Finally, our collective need for knowledge was
long constrained by capital. Making books, for instance, was
expensive and time-consuming, and copies could only be made
by humans, which introduced errors. The spread of knowledge
was limited by the need to create and supply physical copies,
constraints that we have now left behind. There were also
other ways in which capital was scarce as far as knowledge was
64 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
concerned. For instance, we had insufficient scientific instru-
ments for inspecting matter, such as microscopes. Today, by
contrast, we are able to build massive undertakings to support
science, such as the Large Hadron Collider.
ENABLERS
Our progress on the four foundational enablers—energy,
resources, transformation and transportation—is another way
to understand why capital is no longer scarce. There have been
massive breakthroughs on all four during the Industrial Age.
Energy. The biggest breakthrough in energy was the development
of electricity, which allowed us to apply energy ­precisely.
Our remaining challenges relate to the production, storage
and distribution of electricity. Further improvements will let
us meet different needs in new ways, but we are not fundamentally
energy-constrained. For instance, at current effi-
ciency rates, covering less than 0.1 percent of the Earth’s sur-
face with solar panels could meet all of today’s energy needs
(Berners-Lee, 2019).
Resources. The availability of resources was completely
transformed during the Industrial Age through mining, which
was enabled by innovation in transportation (railways) and
energy (steam power). People who have concerns about
sustainability sometimes point to the scarcity of resources
as the primary constraint, but there are three sources that we
can tap in the future: recycling, asteroid mining, and eventu-
ally transmutation (turning one element into another, as in
the alchemists’ quest to turn lead into gold). For instance, a
lot of electronics currently end up in landfills instead of being
CAPITAL 65
recycled, we achieved the first soft landing on an asteroid as
far back as 2001, and we can already turn lithium into tritium.
Transformation. Our ability to transform materials also improved
radically during the Industrial Age. For instance, chemistry
enabled the synthetic production of rubber, which previously
had to be harvested from trees. Machine tools enabled the rapid
transformation of wood and metals. We later added transfor-
mation technologies such as injection molding and additive
manufacturing technologies (often referred to as “3D printing”).
Transportation. Here we went from human-, animal- and
wind-powered movement to machine-powered movement,
dramatically increasing our capabilities. We can now fly across
continents and oceans on commercial flights, reaching any
major city in a single day, and there has been extraordinary
progress in flight safety. While some have complained about a
recent lack of progress, pointing to the lack of commercial su-
personic options following the retirement of Concorde, work
has recently resumed on developing new options for commer-
cial supersonic flight. We have also made tremendous progress
on reusable rockets and autonomous vehicles (for instance,
drones and robots used in warehouses).
The progress made on all these enablers has allowed us to pro-
duce more physical capital, to do so more rapidly and cheaply,
and to transport it anywhere in the world. One illustration of
how far we have come is the fact that mass-produced smart-
phones only became available in 2000, but by 2017 there were
over two billion smartphone users in the world.
I am not claiming that everyone’s needs are being met today,
nor am I arguing that governments should be meeting people’s
needs through government-run programs such as food stamps
66 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
or subsidized housing—quite the opposite. My point is simply
that physical capital is no longer the constraint when it comes
to meeting our individual and collective needs.
Capitalism’s great success is that capital is no longer scarce.
The new scarcity, then, is attention, which capitalism cannot
and will not address without dramatic changes in how we reg-
ulate society and ourselves.
CAPITAL 67
PART III:
ATTENTION IS SCARCE
When I say attention is scarce, I mean that
there is not enough of it available today to
meet our needs. That’s what I set out to
show in this part of the book. First, I will
define attention; then I’ll present several
examples of needs that either are already
no longer met due to a lack of attention—
such as the need for meaning—or are at
risk of not being met in the near future.
After that, I will consider how much
human attention is currently caught up
in Industrial Age activities and how an
increasing amount of attention is being
trapped through our current uses of dig-
ital technology, such as advertising-based
social networks. I will also discuss why
market-based capitalism cannot be used
to allocate attention.
68 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
11. Attention
Attention is to time as velocity is to speed. If I tell you that
I’m driving at a speed of 55 miles per hour, that does not tell
you anything about where I’m going, because you don’t know
what direction I’m heading in. Velocity is speed plus direction.
Similarly, if I tell you that I spent two hours with my family
yesterday (time), that does not tell you anything about what
our minds were directed at—we could have been having an
engaging conversation, or we could have been immersed in our
phones. Attention is time plus intentionality.
The amount of human attention in the world is finite. We
have 24 hours in the day, some of which we need to spend pay-
ing attention to eating, sleeping, and meeting our other needs.
For the remaining hours, the attention of most people is taken
up by having to earn an income and by consuming goods and
services, leaving relatively little time for attention to be freely
allocated. A hard limit on available attention also exists for
humanity as a whole—as I argued earlier, we are headed for
peak population, at which point we will no longer be increasing
the total amount of potentially available attention by adding
more people.
Crucially, we cannot go back in time and change our past
attention, either as individuals or collectively. A student who
walks into an exam unprepared cannot revisit the preceding
weeks and study more. A world that enters a pandemic unprepared
is not able to go back in time and do more research
on coronaviruses.
ATTENTION 69
INDIVIDUAL ATTENTION SCARCITY
First, let’s consider attention at the individual level. The need
for meaning is no longer being met because most people are
failing to give enough attention to the crucial questions of pur-
pose at a time of great transition.
In recent times, all over the world, people had become used
to constructing meaning around their jobs and beliefs, but both
are undermined by digital technologies. Many jobs have come
under pressure from automation or outsourcing. Meanwhile,
ideas, images, and information are no longer contained by geo-
graphic boundaries, and people are increasingly exposed to
opinions and behaviors that diverge from their core beliefs. In
combination, these challenges are leading to a crisis of identity
and meaning. This crisis can take many different forms, including
teenage depression, adult suicide—in the US, particularly
among middle-aged white men—and fatal drug overdoses
(Rodrick, 2019; American Foundation for Suicide Prevention,
2019). Between 2006 and 2019, these problems increased by
99 percent, 26 percent and 43 percent respectively.
The situation is not dissimilar to the one that first occurred
when people left the countryside and moved to big cities
Crisis Statistics
40
30
20
10
0
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Adult White Male Suicides (per 100k) Adult Drug Overdose Deaths (per 100k)
Youth Major Depressive Episodes (% population)
Source: CDC, 2020; National Center for Health Statistics, 2019; Substance Abuse and
Mental Health Services Administration, 2020
70 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
during the transition to the Industrial Age, having to give up
identities that had been constructed around land and crafts
(a process that has continued to play itself out throughout
the world as industrialization spread). They were uprooted
from their extended families and confronted with people from
other regions who held different beliefs. Then too there was a
marked increase in mental illness, drug abuse and suicide.
The Industrial Age had little use for an individual sense
of meaning—it is difficult to combine the pursuit of a strong
sense of personal purpose with the repetitive operation of
an industrial machine day in, day out. Early in the Industrial
Age, religion continued to provide a source of meaning for
most people, as a collective purpose. As the Industrial Age
progressed, however, church attendance decreased, while jobs
and consumption increasingly came to be seen as sources of
meaning. Some of this change can be traced back to the rise of
the “Protestant work ethic,” which provided justification for
wealth accumulation from rising professions (such as lawyers
and doctors) and the managerial class. Some of it is the re-
sult of the massive growth in commercial advertising, which
cleverly tied consumption to such aspirations as freedom
(e.g., the infamous Camel cowboy cigarette ads) and happiness.
We have come so far on that path that people now speak of
“retail therapy,” the idea that you can make yourself feel better
by shopping.
As with such earlier transitions, it is not surprising that
with the current digital dislocation we are yet again seeing a
rise in populist leaders with simplistic messages, such as Don-
ald Trump in the United States and Viktor Orbán in Hungary.
A recent study found that the average share of the vote for
populist parties throughout Europe is more than double what
it was in the 1960s (Inglehart & Norris, 2016). People who lose
their sense of meaning when their purpose and beliefs are
ATTENTION 71
challenged want to be told that things will be okay and that the
answers are simple. “Make America Great Again” is one such
message. These backward-looking movements promise an easy
return to a glorious past. Similarly, we are once again seeing
a growth in church attendance as well as in various spiritual
movements, all of which promise to quickly restore individuals’
access to meaning. The alternative of creating new meaning
through an individual search for purpose and the independent
examination and formation of beliefs requires considerable
attention, which people cannot muster for reasons that we will
examine in detail later in the book.
This individual scarcity of attention to purpose is not con-
fined to any one demographic. People who work multiple jobs
to pay rent and feed their families are definitely impacted, but
so are many people in high-paying jobs, who are often work-
ing more hours than ever and have increased their personal
expenses to the point where they cannot afford to quit. One
might posit that this is the result of a lack of education, but
I often meet young people who have graduated from elite
schools and want to work for a technology startup or get into
venture capital. Most of them are looking for advice about how
to apply to a specific position. After discussing that for some
time, I usually ask them a more open question: “What do you
want from this position?” That often elicits more interesting
answers—they might talk about learning a new skill, or apply-
ing one that they have recently learned.
Sometimes people answer with a desire to contribute to
some cause. When I ask them “What is your purpose?”, shock-
ingly few have paid enough attention to this question to have
an answer. It is often as if they had been presented with this
question for the first time and suddenly realize that “to make
a lot of money” is not actually a purpose that can provide
meaning in life.
72 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
COLLECTIVE ATTENTION SCARCITY
Humanity is also not devoting nearly enough attention to our
collective need for more knowledge to address the threats we
are facing and seize the opportunities ahead of us.
In terms of the threats we face, we are not working nearly
hard enough on reducing the levels of carbon dioxide and
other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Or on monitoring
asteroids that could strike the Earth, and coming up with ways
of deflecting them. Or on containing the current coronavirus
outbreak and future pandemics (an early draft of The World
After Capital, written before 2020, said “containing the next
avian flu” here).
Climate change, “death from above” and pandemics are
three examples of species-level threats that are facing humans.
As I wrote earlier, we are only able to sustain the current global
human population due to technological progress. Each of these
risk categories has the potential to fundamentally disrupt our
ability to meet individual needs. For example, the climate
crisis could result in large-scale global crop failures, which
could mean we would no longer be able to meet everyone’s
needs for calories and nutrients. This is not a hypothetical
concern: it has led to the downfall of prior human civilizations,
such as the Rapa Nui on Easter Island and the Mayans, whose
societies collapsed due to relatively small changes in their local
climate, possibly induced in some measure by their own
actions (White, 2019; Simon, 2020; Seligson, 2019). Now we
are facing a climate crisis on a truly global scale, and we should
be using a significant proportion of all human attention to
fight this threat.
On the opportunity side, far too little human attention is
spent on things such as environmental cleanup, educational re-
sources and basic research. The list here is nearly endless, and
ATTENTION 73
includes unlocking quantum computing and advancing ma-
chine intelligence. The latter is particularly intriguing because
it could help produce more knowledge faster, thus potentially
helping to reduce the scarcity of attention.
None of this means that everyone has to become a scientist
or engineer—there are many other ways to allocate attention
to address these threats and opportunities. For instance, learn-
ing about the climate crisis, sharing that knowledge with oth-
ers, and becoming politically active are all ways of allocating
attention that can directly or indirectly create more knowledge.
So is creating art that inspires others, whether it is to directly
take an action, or by connecting us to our shared humanity as a
source of meaning. This is why when I talk about not creating
enough knowledge, I am not limiting it to scientific knowledge
but including all knowledge, as defined earlier.
Attention scarcity is difficult to alleviate, and I therefore
propose it as a possible explanation for the Fermi paradox.
The physicist Enrico Fermi famously asked why we have not
yet detected any signs of intelligent life elsewhere in our uni-
verse, despite knowing that there are plenty of planets that
could harbor such life. Many different explanations have been
advanced, including that we are the first and hence only intel-
ligent species, or that more advanced intelligent species stay
“dark” for fear of being attacked by even more advanced spe-
cies (the premise of Cixin Liu’s sci-fi trilogy Remembrance of
Earth’s Past). Alternatively, perhaps all civilizations develop
until they have sufficient capital but then suffer from atten-
tion scarcity, so they are quickly wiped out by a pandemic or a
meteor strike. If civilizations that can build radios don’t persist
for very long, the timing of signs of their existence may be very
unlikely to coincide with ours.
Why is our scarce attention so poorly allocated that we
have created a potential extinction-level event in the form of
74 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
a climate crisis? One reason is that we currently use the mar-
ket mechanism to allocate attention. The next sections explain
how this mechanism is sucking huge amounts of attention into
a few systems such as Facebook, while also keeping much of
it trapped in Industrial Age activities. Finally, we will consider
why markets fundamentally cannot allocate attention, which
points to the crucial limits of capitalism.
12. Misallocation
Relative to the great problems and opportunities facing us, we
have seen that attention is scarce, making proper allocation of
available attention the crucial challenge for humanity. As we
will see later, digital technology can help meet this challenge.
But in the recent past, the primary effect of digital technology
has been to misallocate attention.
The internet is exponentially increasing the amount of
available content. Most of the recorded content produced by
humanity has been produced in the last few years, a natural
result of fast exponential growth in the creation of data (Marr,
2019). As a result, it is easy to be overwhelmed. Our limited at-
tention is easily absorbed by the increasing amount of content
tailored to piquing our curiosity and capturing our attention.
Humans are inadequately adapted to the information envi-
ronment we now live in. Checking email, Twitter, Instagram,
and watching yet another YouTube clip or Snapchat story pro-
vide “information hits” that trigger the parts of our brain that
evolved to be stimulated by novelty, social connection, sex-
ual attractiveness, animal cuteness, and so on. For hundreds
MISALLOCATION 75
of thousands of years, when you saw a cat (or a sexy person)
there was an actual cat (or sexy person) somewhere nearby.
Now the internet can provide you with an effectively unlim-
ited stream of cat (or sexy person) pictures. In 2019, the aver-
age person spent nearly two and a half hours on social media
every day, part of a staggering ten and a half hours spent on
some sort of media consumption, or more than 60 percent of
all waking hours (Kemp, 2020; “The Nielsen Total Audience
Report,” 2020).
Importantly, the dominant companies that we use to ac-
cess this information, such as Google, Facebook, and Twitter,
generate most of their revenues by capturing and reselling our
attention. That’s the essence of advertising, which is their busi-
ness model. Advertisers literally buy our attention. Today, in
order to grow, these companies invest in algorithms designed
to present highly targeted, captivating content, thereby captur-
ing more of our attention. News sites like Buzzfeed and the
Huffington Post do the same.
It is much easier to capture attention by appealing to the
parts of our brain that find kittens cute, people sexy, and re-
act with outrage to perceived offenses rather than asking us
to read a long-form essay or work through an argument by
independently weighing evidence. The companies respon-
sible for these systems lack financial incentives to persuade
you to close your computer, put down your smartphone and
spend more time with family and friends, read a book, or go
outdoors and enjoy, or even clean up, the environment. The
financial markets closely track metrics such as number of users
and time spent on a platform, which are predictors of future
growth in advertising revenue. In other words, the markets
that drive the predominant way we use digital technology to
allocate attention reflect the financial interests of investors
and advertisers, which are often orthogonal or even antago-
76 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
nistic to individual and community interests. As we will see
later (see the section “Missing Prices” below) the problem
runs even deeper, as it is actually impossible to construct proper
markets for attention.
13. Trapped
While digital technology is being used to capture rapidly in-
creasing amounts of our attention, we should also consider
what the bulk of attention is dedicated to today. Not surpris-
ingly, since we are just beginning to transition out of it, the vast
bulk of human attention is focused on Industrial Age activities,
in particular labor and consumption. For example, in the US
many people spend 40 or more hours a week on the job, which
amounts to 35 percent of waking hours (assuming eight hours
of sleep per night). People in the US now spend around ten
and a half hours a day consuming media (including traditional
television and radio in addition to Facebook, YouTube, Netflix
and similar services, podcasts, games, and more), which,
setting aside simultaneous usage, amounts to over 60 percent
of waking time (“The Nielsen Total Audience Report,” 2020).
To understand why so much of our attention is spoken for,
I present the concept of the “job loop.”
THE JOB LOOP
Thinking dispassionately about labor is hard, because over the
last couple of centuries we have become convinced that em-
TRAPPED 77
ployment is essential to both the economy and individual dig-
nity. Let’s start from the perspective of production. If you want
to make products or deliver a service, you require a series of
inputs, including buildings and machines (capital), raw mate-
rials or parts (supplies), and human workers (labor). For much
of history, capital and labor have been complementary: as the
owner of a company, you couldn’t use your physical capital
without having labor to operate it. That was true for manu-
facturing and even more so for services, which often use little
capital and consist primarily of labor.
However, there is nothing in economics that says that all
production processes should require labor. The opposite idea is
an artifact of the production functions that were technologically
available when economists developed the theory of production.
If company owners are able to figure out how to do something
cheaper or better by using less or no labor, that’s what they will
choose to do. When it was acquired by Facebook for $19 billion,
for example, WhatsApp had fewer than fifty employees.
Having no labor at all might make sense for a single com-
pany, but it does not for the economy as a whole as it is cur-
rently constructed. Who will buy goods and services produced
by automated systems if people are unemployed and don’t
have any money? Walter Reuther, head of the United Automo-
bile Workers union in the 1950s, often told a story about an
exchange he had with an official of the Ford motor company
(who, as the story became famous in its own right, became
Henry Ford II):
Ford official: How are you going to collect union dues from these
guys [robots]?
Walter Reuther: How are you going to get them to buy Fords?
(O’Toole, 2011)
78 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
If we all had inherited wealth or sufficient income from capital,
an economy without labor would not be a problem, and
we could enjoy the benefits of cheaper products and services
courtesy of robots and automation.
The possibility of a slump in consumer demand due to less
labor long seemed not just unlikely but impossible. There was
a virtuous loop at the heart of economic growth: the job loop.
In today’s economy, the majority of people sell their labor,
producing goods and services and receiving wages in return.
With their wages, they buy smartphones, books, tools, houses
and cars. They also buy the professional assistance of attor-
neys, doctors, car mechanics, gardeners, and hair stylists.
Most of the people who sell these goods and services are in
turn employed, meaning that they too sell their labor and buy
goods and services from other people with what they are paid.
And round and round it goes.
The job loop worked incredibly well in combination with
competitive markets for goods and services and with a prop-
erly functioning financial system. Entrepreneurs either used
debt or equity to start new businesses, and employed people at
wages that were often higher than older businesses, increasing
THE JOB LOOP
S
E
L
L
L
A
B
O
R
B
U
Y
S
T
U
F
F
TRAPPED 79
their employees’ purchasing power and thereby fueling further
innovation and growth. As far as expanding economic produc-
tion and solving problems for which markets are well-suited, it
was a virtuous cycle that resulted in unprecedented prosperity
and innovation.
Some might point out that many people these days are
self-employed, but that is irrelevant if they are selling their
time. For instance, a graphic designer who works as an inde-
pendent contractor is still paid for the labor they put into a
project. It is only if they design something that is paid for over
and over without them spending further time on it, such as a
graphics template, that they have the opportunity to leave the
job loop.
There are multiple problems with this virtuous cycle today.
First, as we calculated at the outset of this section, it traps the
vast majority of human attention. Second, when things con-
tract, the effect of mutual reinforcement applies in the other
direction. Take a small town, for example, in which local stores
provide some of the employment. If a big superstore comes
into town, total retail employment and wages will both fall.
Fewer store employees have income, and those who do have
less. If they start to spend less on haircuts and car repairs,
the hair stylist and car mechanic earn less and can spend less
themselves, and so on. Third, much of the consumption today
is driven by vast sums of money spent on advertising, as well
as by exposure to social media, inducing people into positional
spending on wants (e.g., a bigger car than their neighbor).
These higher expenditure levels, in turn, lock people into jobs
which they hate but cannot afford to leave, which explains a
great deal of the frustration among relatively highly-paid pro-
fessionals, such as lawyers and bankers.
Put differently, what was once a virtuous loop has become
a vicious loop that holds much of human attention trapped.
80 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Much of The World After Capital is about breaking free of this
vicious version of the job loop. That is an urgent problem as the
job loop has been becoming more vicious for some time now
due to a change in the relationship between labor and capital.
THE GREAT DECOUPLING
To understand what is happening to the job loop, we need to
look at a change in the economy that has become known as
“The Great Decoupling” (Bernstein & Raman, 2015). In the
decades after World War II, as the US economy grew, the share
of gross domestic product (GDP) going to labor grew at the
same rate. However, starting in the mid-1970s, GDP contin-
ued to grow while household income remained flat (Economic
Policy Institute, n.d.).
Over this time of stagnant incomes, and particularly from
the mid-1980s onward, US GDP growth was increasingly financed
by consumers going into debt, until we reached the limit of
how much debt households could support. The first event that
really drove that point home was the collapse of the US hous-
ing bubble. Some evidence shows that we are hitting another
200
150
100
50
0
1953
2017
2013
2009
2005
2001
1997
1993
1989
1985
1981
1977
1973
1969
1965
1961
1957
The Great Decoupling
Median Household Income (1984=100)
Real GDP Per Capita (1984=100)
Source: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 2021a
TRAPPED 81
such point right now as a result of the COVID-19 crisis, which
has led to dramatic increases in unemployment.
Similar changes have occurred in other developed econo-
mies. This decoupling may be partly accounted for by changing
demographics, but the primary driver appears to be technology.
As technological innovation accelerates, there will be further
pressure on the job loop. Particularly worrisome is the fact that
jobs in developing countries are highly exposed to automation
(The Economist, 2016). As a result, these countries may either
skip the “golden age of the job loop” entirely or have a much
diminished version.
So, while we want to free up the attention trapped in the job
loop, we need to figure out how to do so gradually, rather than
through a rapid collapse. But is such a collapse even possible?
LUMP OF LABOR OR MAGIC EMPLOYMENT
FALLACY?
With the job loop still dominant, people have to sell their labor
to earn a living. Until recently, most economists believed that
when human labor is replaced by technology in one economic
82 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
activity, it finds work in another part. These economists refer
to a fear of technological unemployment or underemployment
as the “lump of labor fallacy.”
The argument is that automating some part of the econ-
omy frees up labor to work on something else—entrepreneurs
might use this newly available labor to deliver innovative new
products and services, for example. There is no fixed “lump” of
labor; rather there are potentially an infinite number of things
to work on. After all, this is what has happened historically.
Why should this time be different?
To understand how things could be different, we might con-
sider the role horses have played in the American economy. As
recently as 1915, 25 million horses worked in agriculture and
transportation; by 1960, that number had declined to 3 million,
and then we stopped keeping track entirely as horses became
irrelevant (Kilby, 2007). This decline happened because we
figured out how to build tractors, cars, and tanks. There were
just no uses left for which horses were superior to a mechani-
cal substitute. The economist Wassily Leontief (1952) pointed
out that the same thing could happen to humans in his article
“Machines and Man.”
Humans obviously have a broader range of skills than
horses, which is why we have so far always found new employ-
ment. So what has changed? Basically, we’ve figured out how to
have computers do lots of things that until recently we thought
only humans could do, such as driving a car. Digital technology
gives us universal computation at zero marginal cost.
Suddenly, the idea that we humans might have fewer uses
doesn’t seem quite so inconceivable.
Those who claim that this is committing the lump of labor
fallacy argue that we haven’t considered a new set of human
activities that will employ people, but that line of thinking
might also be flawed. Just because we have found new employ-
TRAPPED 83
ment in the past doesn’t mean we will in the future. I call this
belief the “magic employment fallacy.”
We can be incredibly creative when it comes to thinking
of new things to spend our time on, but the operative ques-
tion for people selling their labor is whether they can get paid
enough to afford solutions to their needs, such as food, shelter
and clothing. The only thing that matters for this question is
whether a machine or another human is capable of doing what-
ever we think of more cheaply.
This turns out to be the central problem with the magic
employment fallacy. Nothing in economic theory says what
the “market-clearing price” for labor—the wage level at which
there is neither unemployment nor a labor shortage—ought
to be. It might be well below what people need to cover their
needs, which could present a near-term existential threat to
many people. We thus appear to face a dilemma. On the one
hand, we want to free up human attention for uses that the job
loop doesn’t provide for. On the other hand, we want to avoid
a rapid collapse of the job loop. In order to understand how
we can accomplish both, we need to consider the relationship
between the cost of labor and innovation.
EXPENSIVE LABOR AND INNOVATION
Some people argue that unions made labor expensive, resulting
in unaffordable products and services. But in reality, increased
labor costs in fact propelled us to become more efficient: En-
trepreneurs overcame the challenge of more expensive labor by
building better machines that required fewer humans. In coun-
tries such as India, the abundance of cheap labor meant that
for a long time there was little incentive to invest in machines,
since it was cheaper to have people do the work by hand.
84 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Globally, we face the risk of being stuck in a low innovation
trap precisely as a result of a fear that automation will make
labor cheap. For example, we might end up with many more
years of people driving trucks across the country, long after
a machine could do the same job more safely (Wong, 2016).
After all, why automate a job if you can get someone to do it for
minimum wage?
Some people object to automation innovations on the
grounds that work is an integral part of people’s identity. If you
have been a truck driver for many years, for instance, who will
you be if you lose your job? At first, this might sound like a
completely legitimate question. But it is worth recalling that
the idea that purpose primarily has to do with one’s profes-
sion, instead of belonging to a religion or to a community, is an
Industrial Age phenomenon.
If we want to free up attention via automation, we need to
come up with new answers to these concerns. That will be the
subject of Part Four, but before getting there we will first con-
sider why capitalism alone can’t solve these problems.
14. Limits of Capitalism
Capitalism has been so successful that even theoretically com-
munist countries like China have embraced it. But it cannot
solve the scarcity of attention without significant changes in
regulation, due to three important limitations. First, prices will
always be missing for things that we should be paying atten-
tion to. Second, capitalism has limited means for dealing with
the concentration in wealth and market power arising from
LIMITS OF CAPITALISM 85
digital technologies. Third, capitalism protects the interests
of capital over knowledge. Our urgent need for change thus
stems directly from capitalism’s success—the problems that
are left are the ones it cannot solve.
MISSING PRICES
Capitalism won’t help us allocate attention because it relies
on prices that are determined in markets. Prices are powerful
because they efficiently aggregate information about consumer
preferences and producer capabilities, but not everything can
be priced. And increasingly, the things that cannot be priced
are becoming more important than those that can: for example,
the benefits of space exploration, the cost of the climate crisis,
or an individual’s sense of purpose.
The lack of prices for many things is not just a question of
a missing market that can be created through regulation. The
first foundational issue is the zero marginal cost of copies
and distribution in the digital realm. From a social perspec-
tive, we should make all the world’s knowledge, including
services such as medical diagnoses, available for free at the
margin. But this means that as long as we rely on the price
mechanism, we will under-produce digital resources. Just as
the Industrial Age has been full of negative externalities such
as pollution, resulting in overproduction, the Knowledge
Age is full of positive externalities, such as learning, which
implies underproduction. If we rely on the market mecha-
nism, we will not pay nearly enough attention to the creation
of free educational resources.
The second foundational issue is uncertainty. Because
prices aggregate information, they fail when no such infor-
mation exists. When events are either incredibly rare or have
86 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
never occurred, we have no information on their frequency
or severity, and the price mechanism cannot work when fore-
cast error is infinite. For instance, large asteroid impacts on
Earth occur millions of years apart, and hence no price can
help us allocate attention to detecting them and building sys-
tems to deflect them. As a result, we pay a trivial amount of
attention to such problems relative to the potential damage
they would cause.
The third foundational issue is new knowledge. The further
removed such knowledge is from creating a product or service
that can be sold, the less use the price mechanism is. Con-
sider early aviation pioneers, for example. They pursued flight
because they were fascinated by solving a challenge rather than
because there was an obvious market for air travel. Or take
the early days of quantum computing: Actual machines were
still decades away, so at that time the price mechanism would
not have allocated attention to the discipline. Much of this
knowledge therefore needs to be produced by allocating atten-
tion through other mechanisms, such as government-funded
research, academic institutions, and prizes.
The fourth foundational issue is that for markets and prices
to exist, there have to be multiple buyers (demand) and sell-
ers (supply). There is no demand and supply for you to spend
time with your children or to figure out your purpose in life.
Capitalism cannot help us allocate attention to anything that
is deeply personal.
A way of summarizing all of these examples is to think of
the world as divided into an economic sphere (where prices
exist) and a non-economic one. Market-based allocation of
attention can only succeed in the former and, to the extent
that there are insufficient counterweights, will do so at the
detriment of attention allocated to the non-economic sphere.
This is the high-earning parent who doesn’t spend enough time
LIMITS OF CAPITALISM 87
with their children, or the legions of science PhDs optimizing
ad algorithms instead of working on the climate crisis.
POWER LAWS
When it comes to the distribution of income and wealth, many
different outcomes are possible, and what actually happens
depends both on the underlying production function and
government regulation. Consider a manual production func-
tion that was common before industrialization. If you were a
cobbler making shoes by hand, for instance, there was a limit
to the number of shoes you could produce.
Then along came industrialization and economies of scale.
If you made more cars, say, you could make them more cheaply.
That is why, over time, there were relatively few car manufac-
turers around the world and the owners of the surviving ones
had large fortunes.
Still, these manufacturing businesses stayed fairly compet-
itive with each other even as they grew large, which limited
their market power and thereby the amount of wealth that
they generated. Many service businesses have relatively small
economies of scale, which has allowed a great many of them
to exist, and markets such as nail salons and restaurants have
remained highly competitive. Finance is one clear exception
to this among services. A few large banks, insurance compa-
nies, and brokerage firms tend to dominate the finance indus-
try, and that has accelerated in recent years, largely because
financial services have already been heavily impacted by
digital technology.
With digital technology, we are seeing a shift to ever-higher
market power and wealth concentration. When you plot the
outcomes, such as companies by revenue, the resulting curves
88 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
look like so-called “power laws:” the biggest firm is a lot bigger
than the next biggest firm, which in turn is a lot bigger than
the third largest, and so on. This pattern is pervasive through-
out digital technology and the industries in which it plays a
major role. For instance, the most watched video on YouTube
has been watched billions of times, while the vast majority of
videos have been watched just a few times. In e-commerce,
Amazon is an order of magnitude larger than its biggest com-
petitor, and several orders of magnitude larger than most
e-commerce companies. The same goes for apps: The leading
ones have hundreds of millions of users, but the vast majority
have just a few.
Digital technologies are driving these power laws due to
zero marginal cost, as explained earlier, as well as through net-
work effects. Network effects occur when a service gets better
for all participants as more people or companies join the ser-
vice. For example, as Facebook grew, both new and early us-
ers had more people they could connect with. This means that
once a company grows to a certain size, it becomes harder and
harder for new entrants to compete, as their initially smaller
networks offer less benefit to participants. In the absence of
some kind of regulation, the combination of zero marginal cost
with network effects results in extremely lopsided outcomes.
So far, we have seen one social network, Facebook, and one
search company, Google, dominate all others.
This shift to power laws is driving a huge increase in wealth
and income inequality, to levels that are even beyond the
previous peak of the early 1900s. Inequality beyond a certain
level is socially corrosive, as the wealthy start to live in a world
disconnected from the problems faced by large parts of the
population.
Beyond the social implications of such inequality, the larg-
est digital companies also wield undue political and market
LIMITS OF CAPITALISM 89
power. When Amazon acquired a relatively small online phar-
macy, signaling its intent to compete in that market, there
was a dramatic drop in the market capitalization of pharmacy
chains. Historically, market power produced inefficient alloca-
tions due to excessive rents as prices were kept artificially high.
In digital markets, in contrast, powerful companies have often
pushed prices down or even made things free.
While this appears positive at first, the harm to customers
comes via reduced innovation, as companies and investors
stop trying to bring better alternative products to market (con-
sider, for example, the lack of innovation in internet searching).
Joseph Schumpeter coined the term “creative destruction”
to describe the way in which entrepreneurs create new prod-
ucts, technologies, methods, and ultimately economic struc-
tures to replace old ones (Kopp, 2021). Indeed, if you look
at the dominant companies today, such as Google, Amazon
and Facebook, they are all relatively new, having displaced
in importance those of the Industrial Age. However, such
“Schumpeterian” innovation will be more difficult going for-
ward, if not downright impossible. During the Industrial Age,
machines served a specific purpose, which meant that when
a new product or manufacturing technology became available,
the installed base of machines became essentially worthless.
Today, general-purpose computers can easily implement a new
product, add a feature or adopt a new algorithm. Furthermore,
production functions with information as a key input have a
property known as “supermodularity.” The more information
you have, the higher the marginal benefit of additional infor-
mation (Wenger, 2012). This gives the incumbent companies
tremendous sustained power—they gain more marginal value
from a new product or service than a new entrant does.
90 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
SELF-CONSERVATION
Toward the end of the Agrarian Age, when land was scarce,
political elites came from the landowning classes, and their
influence wasn’t truly diminished until after the Second World
War. Now, although we have reached the end of the time of
capital scarcity, political elites largely represent the interests
of capital holders. In some countries, such as China, senior
political leaders and their families own large parts of industry
outright. In other countries such as the United States, politi-
cians are heavily influenced by the owners of capital because
of the need to raise funds, the impact on policy of lobbyists,
think tanks and foundations backed by capital, the skewing of
public debate through capital-owned media (e.g. FOX), as well
as global “regulatory competition” allowing capital owners
to play governments off against one another to limit wealth
redistribution through taxation. Consider lobbying: Over a
five-year period, the 200 most politically active companies
spent nearly $6 billion to influence policy (Allison & Harkins,
2014). A clever study from 2019 showed how this kind of lobby-
ing directly impacts the language of laws subsequently drafted
by lawmakers (O’Dell & Penzenstadler, 2019).
The net effect of all of this are policies that are favorable to
owners of capital, such as low rates of capital gains tax. Low
corporate tax rates, with loopholes that allow corporations to
accumulate profits in countries where taxes are low, are also
favorable to owners of capital. This is why in many countries
we have some of the lowest effective tax rates for corporations
and wealthy individuals and families in history (“effective”
means what is paid after exemptions and other ways of reduc-
ing or avoiding tax payments).
In addition to preserving and creating financial benefits
for the owners of capital, corporations have also attacked the
POWER OF KNOWLEDGE 91
creation and sharing of knowledge. They have lobbied heav-
ily to lengthen terms of copyright and to strengthen copyright
protection. Scientific publishers have even made access to
knowledge so expensive that libraries and universities struggle
to afford the subscriptions (Sample, 2018; Buranyi, 2018).
Thus, a key limitation of capitalism is that without mean-
ingful change, it will keep us trapped in the Industrial Age
by keeping governments and the political process focused
on capital. As long as that is the case, we will continue over-allocating
attention to work and consumption and under-allocating
it to areas such as the individual need for meaning
and the collective need for the growth of knowledge. Parts
Four and Five of The World After Capital will examine how we
can get out of the Industrial Age, but first we will take a closer
look at the power of knowledge and the promise of the digital
knowledge loop.
15. Power of Knowledge
Have you watched television recently? Stored food in a refrig-
erator? Accessed the internet? Played games on your smart-
phone? Driven a car? These are all things that billions of people
around the world do every day. And while these goods are pro-
duced by different companies using a wide range of technolo-
gies, none of them would exist if we didn’t have knowledge.
Knowledge, as I defined it earlier, is the information that
humanity has recorded in a medium and improved over time.
As a reminder, there are two crucial parts to this definition.
The first is “recorded in a medium,” which allows information
92 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
to be shared across time and space. The second is “improved
over time,” which separates knowledge from information.
Improvement is the result of the operation of the critical
process, which allows for existing knowledge to be criticized
and alternatives to be proposed. Through this process, knowl-
edge becomes better at helping us humans meet our needs.
I began this section with examples of everyday technolo-
gies that would not exist without knowledge. An even stron-
ger illustration of the power of knowledge is that without it,
many of us would not even be here today. As we saw in our
discussion of population, Malthus was right about population
growth but wrong about its consequences because he did not
foresee the development of technological progress powered by
improved knowledge.
Let’s look at a specific example of how this process un-
folded. Humans breathe air, but for a long time we did not
know what it consisted of. Oxygen and nitrogen, the two pri-
mary components of air, were not identified as elements until
the late eighteenth century.
Separately, although manure had been used in agricultural
practice for millennia, it was not properly studied until the
early nineteenth century. By the late 19th century, scientists
had finally discovered the microbes that convert nitrogen
into a form that plants can use. That led to the understanding
that ammonia, which consists of nitrogen and hydrogen, is a
powerful fertilizer. Scientific progress eventually resulted in
the Haber process for nitrogen fixation which allows for the
mass production of fertilizer. Invented in the early twentieth
century, it became crucial for raising agricultural yields globally,
thus averting the dire consequences Malthus had envis-
aged. Today, about half of the nitrogen in our bodies has been
touched by the Haber process on its way into the plants and
animals that we eat.
POWER OF KNOWLEDGE 93
My simplified history of the discovery of nitrogen fixation
doesn’t capture the many false starts along the way. It seems
strange to us now, but at one point a leading theory as to why
some materials burn was that they all contain a substance
called “phlogiston,” which was thought to be released during
combustion or “dephlogistication.” Without the improvement
of knowledge over time, we might have remained stuck on that
theory, failing to find oxygen and nitrogen and thus to increase
agricultural yields, and thereby potentially exposing humanity
to a Malthusian crisis.
This is just one example of a knowledge breakthrough that
allowed humanity to overcome a seemingly insurmountable
barrier to progress. When thinking about the power of knowl-
edge, we must remember that both our individual lifetimes and
the history of modern science to date are trivially short in the
timescale of humanity, which in turn is minuscule compared
to that of the universe. When considering longer time frames,
we should regard all speculative technological advances that
don’t contravene the laws of physics as possible and eventually
achievable. This line of thinking about the power of knowledge
is inspired by a theoretical foundation for science recently de-
veloped by the physicists David Deutsch and Chiara Marletto
called constructor theory (“Constructor Theory,” 2020).
Consider for a moment what knowledge might allow us to
do in the more or less distant future. We might rid ourselves
of our dependence on fossil fuels, cure any disease, and travel
to other planets in our solar system (organizations like SpaceX
and NASA are already working toward this goal) (NASA, 2018).
Eventually, we might even travel to the stars. You might think
interstellar travel is impossible, but it isn’t. Extremely difficult?
Yes. Requiring technology that doesn’t exist yet? Yes. But im-
possible? No. It is definitely not imminent, but we can count on
it to becoming possible with the further accretion of knowledge.
94 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
We are the only species on Earth that has created knowl-
edge—not just science, but also art. Art allows us to express
our hopes and fears, and culture has helped to motivate the
large-scale coordination and mobilization of human effort.
We might think of the technical component of knowledge as
underpinning the “how” of our lives, and the artistic compo-
nent the “why.” If you’ve ever doubted the power of art, just
think of the many times throughout history when dictators and
authoritarian regimes have banned or destroyed works of art.
THE KNOWLEDGE LOOP
Knowledge has already made possible something extraordi-
nary: By means of the innovations of the Industrial Age, we
can, in principle, meet everyone’s needs. But we must gener-
ate additional knowledge to solve the problems we have intro-
duced along the way, such as the climate crisis. New knowledge
does not spring forth fully formed out of a vacuum. Instead it
emerges through what I call the “knowledge loop,” in which
someone learns something and creates something new, which
is then shared and in turn serves as the basis for more learning.
THE KNOWLEDGE LOOP
C
R
E
A
T
E
S
H
A
R
E
L
E
A
R
N
POWER OF KNOWLEDGE 95
The knowledge loop has been around since humans first de-
veloped written language some five thousand years ago. Before
that, humans were able to use spoken language, but that limits
learning and sharing in terms of both time and space. Since
the invention of written language, breakthroughs have acceler-
ated and access to the knowledge loop has broadened. Among
those breakthroughs are moveable type (around one thousand
years ago), the printing press (around five hundred years ago),
and more recently the telegraph, radio, and television. Now we
are in the middle of another fundamental breakthrough: digital
technology, which connects all of humanity to the knowledge
loop at zero marginal cost, and also allows machines them-
selves to participate in it.
It is easy to underestimate the potential of digital technology
to further accelerate and broaden access to the knowledge
loop. To many people, it seems as if these innovations have so
far under-delivered. The technology investor Peter Thiel once
famously complained that “We wanted flying cars, instead we
got 140 characters.” In fact, we have made great progress on
flying cars since then, in no small part because digital technol-
ogies have already helped accelerate the knowledge loop.
THE PROMISE AND PERIL OF THE DIGITAL
KNOWLEDGE LOOP
The zero marginal cost and universality of digital technologies
are already accelerating learning, creating, and sharing, giving
rise to a digital knowledge loop. And as can be seen in the exam-
ple of YouTube, it holds both amazing promise and great peril.
YouTube has experienced astounding growth since its
launch in 2005. People around the world now upload over
100 hours of video content to the platform every minute. To
96 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
illustrate just how much content that is, if you were to spend
100 years watching YouTube 24 hours a day, you would be un-
able to watch all the videos uploaded in a single week.
YouTube contains amazing educational content on topics
as diverse as gardening and pure mathematics. Many of those
videos illustrate the promise of the digital knowledge loop,
but the peril is also clear: YouTube also contains videos that
peddle conspiracies, spread misinformation, and even incite
hate. Promoting such videos may, perversely, be in YouTube’s
interest, as these capture more attention, which can then
be resold to advertisers, thus growing YouTube’s revenues
and profits.
Both the promise and the peril are made possible by the
same characteristics of the platform: All of the videos are avail-
able for free to anyone in the world, and they become available
globally the second they are published. Anybody can publish a
video, and all you need to access them is an internet connec-
tion and a smartphone. As a result, two to three billion people,
almost half of the world’s population, have access to YouTube
and can participate in the digital knowledge loop.
These characteristics are found in other systems that sim-
ilarly show the promise and peril of the digital knowledge
loop. Wikipedia, the collectively produced online encyclope-
dia, is another good example. At its most promising, someone
might read an entry and learn the method Pythagoras used to
approximate pi, then create an animation that illustrates this
method, publishing it on Wikipedia, thus making it easier for
other people to learn.
Wikipedia entries result from collaboration and an ongoing
revision process. You can also examine both the history of the
page and the conversations about it, thanks to a piece of soft-
ware known as a “wiki” that keeps track of the history of edits
to a page (“Wiki,” n.d.).
POWER OF KNOWLEDGE 97
When the process works, it raises the quality of entries over
time. But when there is a coordinated effort at manipulation,
Wikipedia can spread misinformation instantly and globally.
Wikipedia illustrates another important aspect of the digital
knowledge loop: It allows individuals to participate in extremely
small ways. If you wish, you can contribute to Wikipe-
dia by fixing a single typo. If ten thousand people fixed one
typo every day, that would be 3.65 million typos a year. If we
assume that it takes two minutes to discover and fix a typo,
it would take nearly fifty people working full-time for a year
(2,500 hours) to fix that many typos.
The example of a Wikipedia spelling correction shows the
power of small contributions that add up within the digital
knowledge loop. Their peril can be seen on social networks
such as Twitter and Facebook, where the small contributions
are likes and retweets or reposts to one’s friends or followers.
While these tiny actions can amplify high-quality content, they
can also spread mistakes, rumors, and propaganda: Indeed, re-
search carried out at MIT in 2018 found that fake news stories
spread faster and more widely than true ones (Vosoughi et al.,
2018) (see “Freedom to Learn” below). These information cas-
cades can have significant consequences, ranging from jokes
going viral to the outcomes of elections being affected. They
have even contributed to major outbreaks of violence, as in the
well-known case of the brutal persecution of the Rohingya in
Myanmar (BBC News, 2018).
Some platforms make it possible for people to contribute
passively to the digital knowledge loop. Waze is a GPS naviga-
tion app. It tracks users that seem to be in a car, and the speed
at which they are moving. It then passes that information back
to its servers, and algorithms figure out where traffic is mov-
ing smoothly and where drivers will encounter traffic jams.
Waze then proposes alternative routes, taking the traffic into
98 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
account. If you follow a different route proposed by Waze, you
automatically contribute your speed on that detour, a further
example of passive contribution.
To see the peril of passive contribution, consider Google’s
autocomplete for search queries, which are derived from what
people frequently search for. As a result, they often reflect
existing biases, further amplifying them: Often, instead of
typing out their whole query, users select one of the autocom-
pleted options presented to them. Another example of danger-
ous passive contribution are suggested “follows” on networks
such as Twitter. These often present accounts of people similar
to the ones someone is already connected with, thus deepening
connections among people who think alike while cutting them
off from other groups, a phenomenon giving rise to a kind of
“Cyber-Balkans” (Van Alstyne & Brynjolfsson, 2005).
The promise of the digital knowledge loop is broad access
to a rapidly improving body of knowledge. The peril is that it
will lead to a post-truth society that is constantly in conflict.
Both of these possibilities are enabled by the same characteristics
of digital technologies. Here once again, we can see that
technology by itself does not determine the future.
TECHNOLOGY IS NOT ENOUGH
Achieving the promise of the digital knowledge loop and side-
stepping its perils will require human societies to go through a
massive transition on a par with the two previous ones, from
the Forager Age to the Agrarian Age and from the Agrarian Age
to the Industrial Age. We now need to leave the Industrial Age
behind and enter the next one, which I am calling the Knowl-
edge Age. We have based our economies around the job loop,
which traps a lot of our attention. We have constructed our
POWER OF KNOWLEDGE 99
laws governing access to information and computation as
if they were industrial products. We have adopted a range of
beliefs that keep us tied to jobs and consumption, and we are
utterly overwhelmed by the new information environment.
All of that has to change.
The transition will be difficult, however, because the Indus-
trial Age is a system with many interlocking parts, and systems
are highly resistant to change. As we saw earlier, simply har-
nessing digital technology to the existing system results in a
hugely uneven distribution of power, income, and wealth. Even
worse, it tilts the digital knowledge loop away from its promise
and toward its perils.
The human species is facing problems that we can only
overcome if we use digital technology to alleviate rather than
worsen attention scarcity. We must reap the promise and limit
the perils of digital technology for the knowledge loop. In order
to successfully negotiate the transition into the Knowledge
Age, we need to make dramatic changes in both collective
regulation and self-regulation. This is what we will explore in
Part Four.
100 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
PART IV:
ENHANCING FREEDOM
My first major aim in writing this book was
to establish that we are currently experi-
encing a period of non-linear change, and
my second aim is to outline a plan for our
transition to the Knowledge Age. Our chal-
lenge is to overcome the limits of capital-
ism and move away from a society centered
on the job loop toward one that embraces
the knowledge loop. This section of The
World After Capital will propose changes in
regulation and self-regulation that would
increase human freedom and unlock the
promise of the digital knowledge loop.
There are three components to this:
1. Economic freedom. We must ensure
that everyone’s needs are met without
them being forced into the job loop.
Once we have economic freedom, we
can embrace automation and enable
everyone to participate in and benefit
from the digital knowledge loop.
POWER OF KNOWLEDGE 101
2. Informational freedom. We must re-
move barriers to the digital knowledge
loop that limit our ability to learn from
existing knowledge, in order to accel-
erate the creation and sharing of new
knowledge. At the same time, we must
build systems into the digital knowledge
loop that support critical inquiry.
3. Psychological freedom. We must free
ourselves from scarcity thinking and
the associated fears that impede our
participation in the digital knowledge
loop. Learning, creating, and sharing
knowledge all require us to overcome
barriers in our minds, some of which
are evolutionary while others are the
result of social pressure.
With these increased freedoms will come
the possibility of a peaceful transition
from the Industrial Age to the Knowledge
Age that is not dictated from the top down,
but results from the choices of individu-
als and the communities they form. There
102 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
is no guarantee that these changes will
be sufficient to avoid a disastrous tran-
sition, but I am convinced that without
them we are headed for just that, incur-
ring species-level risk for humanity. Later
in the book, I will discuss the values and
systems that are necessary for successful
collective action in a world of increased
individual freedom.
ECONOMIC FREEDOM 103
16. Economic Freedom
If you were to quit your job right now, could you afford to take
care of your needs? And if you are retired, what would hap-
pen if you suddenly stopped receiving your pension? If you are
supported by a spouse or partner, could you still afford food,
shelter and clothing without them? If you could no longer meet
your needs in any of these situations, you are not economically
free. Your decisions on how much of your labor to sell and
whom to sell it to, whether to stay with your partner and where
to live, are not free decisions.
Many people in the US are not free in this sense. A recent
survey asked respondents if they had enough money to pay
for a $1,000 emergency, and 60 percent said they did not
(Leonhardt, 2020). Other studies have found that about 75 per-
cent of Americans over the age of forty are behind on saving
for retirement, and somewhere between a quarter and a third
of all non-retired adults have no savings at all (Board of Gov-
ernors of the Federal Reserve System, 2020; Backman, 2020).
This data predates the COVID-19 pandemic, which wreaked
further havoc on the finances of many Americans.
If you are not economically free, you are not able to par-
ticipate freely in the knowledge loop, which is why economic
freedom is a cornerstone of the Knowledge Age. We must
make people economically free so that they have the time to
learn new knowledge, from practical skills to the latest theo-
retical physics. We need them to create new knowledge using
what they have learned. And finally, we need them to share this
knowledge with others.
Participation in the knowledge loop has never been more
important: We have massive problems to overcome, including
104 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
the COVID-19 pandemic and, above all, the climate crisis. To
do so, we must be able to embrace automation rather than feel
threatened by it.
UNIVERSAL BASIC INCOME
Economic freedom is a reality for the wealthy, for tenured pro-
fessors, and retirees with pensions and savings, but how can we
make it a reality for everyone? The answer is to provide every-
one with a guaranteed income to cover solutions to their needs,
including housing, clothing, and food. This income wouldn’t
depend on whether someone is married or single, employed
or unemployed, rich or poor—it would be unconditional (also
referred to as “universal”).
At first glance, this idea of a universal basic income (UBI)
may seem outrageous. Getting paid simply for being alive—
isn’t that akin to socialism? Where would this money come
from? And won’t people simply descend into laziness and drug
addiction? We will examine each of these objections to UBI in
turn, but let’s first consider the arguments for UBI as a way of
achieving economic freedom.
Concerns about economic freedom are by no means new.
When the American republic was in its infancy, economic free-
dom was within the reach of those involved in the colonial proj-
ect. There was plenty of land available to settler colonialists,
and they could hypothetically make ends meet through small-
scale farming (also known as subsistence farming). Thomas
Jefferson considered formalizing the idea of land grants as a
way of ensuring a free citizenry. It is important to point out
that this land was being taken away from Native Americans,
who were losing both their land and their freedom, on the basis
of the so-called Doctrine of Discovery (“Discovery Doctrine,”
ECONOMIC FREEDOM 105
2020). Even back then, observers such as the philosopher and
political activist Thomas Paine (1797) understood that land
that could be appropriated and allocated to settlers as prop-
erty would run out at some point, raising the specter of a time
when landless citizens might have to rent themselves out as la-
borers to provide for their needs. From this, he concluded that
an alternative to land would be to give people money instead.
The idea of increased freedom through direct cash transfers
thus dates back to the earliest days of the American republic.
If you don’t find this argument for UBI compelling, consider
the case of air. We can all afford to breathe air because it is free
and distributed around the globe (Important side note: Regu-
lation is required to keep it clean—there were many problems
with air pollution during industrialization, and it is estimated
that more than seven million people still die around the world
every year from air pollution) (World Health Organization,
n.d.). Our freedom is thus not restricted by having to find air,
and the power of UBI would be to make us equally free when it
comes to our other needs, by making food, housing, and cloth-
ing affordable for everyone.
As I argued earlier, our technologies are sufficiently advanced
that we are capable of meeting everyone’s needs. Farming
can generate enough food for everyone. We can easily make
enough clothing and provide everyone with shelter. The
knowledge and capital that humanity has created have made
this possible. And our technological progress is accelerating
while global population growth is slowing, so all this will get
easier—that is, as long as we generate enough new knowledge
to overcome the problems we are facing, starting with the
climate crisis.
The question is not whether we have the ability to meet
everyone’s needs, but whether our economy and society dis-
tribute the resources fairly, and that is where UBI comes in.
106 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
UBI enables markets to function without forcing people into
the job loop. It lets everyone freely choose whether and to
what extent they participate in these markets and how much
they devote to personal relationships, the pursuit of meaning,
curiosity, creativity and the like—freeing up attention and
enabling people to form new communities in more affordable
geographies (e.g. smaller cities or the countryside).
Industrial society presents us with two different ways of
allocating resources. In one, individuals participate in a mar-
ket economy; in the other, governments provide for people’s
needs. Those options form the extremes of a spectrum that has
a variety of hybrid arrangements in the middle, such as govern-
ment-subsidized housing, for which people pay reduced rent.
UBI broadens the scope for market-based allocation, thus reducing
reliance on an ever-expanding government sector. In that
regard, it is the opposite of socialism and communism, which
rely predominantly or even entirely on government allocation.
Right after the Second World War, only about 5 percent of
people in the US were employed by the government, which
comprised about 42 percent of the economy (U.S. Bureau of
the Census, 1949; OECD 2021a). In the Soviet Union, by con-
trast, most of the working population was employed by the
state, which owned close to 100 percent of the economy, but
that system turned out to be much less effective at allocating
resources. Nevertheless, the size and scope of government
spending has gradually expanded in the US and in Europe. In
many European economies it now accounts for more than half
of the economy.
Food, clothing and shelter are obvious solutions to human
needs that UBI should make affordable, but UBI could eventually
also cover the cost of education and healthcare. That
might seem ambitious, given how quickly education and
healthcare costs have risen over the past decades, but techno-
ECONOMIC FREEDOM 107
logy can be expected to make both of these far more afford-
able in the near future.
TECHNOLOGICAL DEFLATION
If you’re struggling to take care of your needs, the world will
seem like an expensive place. Yet the data show that a lot of
things have been getting cheaper for some time. In the US, as
the chart below shows, the price of consumer durables has
been falling since the mid-1990s.
The decline in the price of consumer durables has been
made possible by technological progress. We are getting better
at making stuff, and the automation of production and distri-
bution is a big part of that. While this will hurt you if you lose
your job as a result, if you have money to buy things it will help
you. And with UBI, everyone will have money, which, as prices
fall over time, will buy more and more.
The decline in the price of consumer durables has made
adequate clothing easily affordable. Technology is also driving
1980
800
600
400
200
0
2020
2000 2010
1990
U.S. Consumer Durables, Healthcare and
Education Price Indices
CPI Durables, Seasonally Adjusted
College Tuition & Fees, U.S. City Average
Medical Care, U.S. City Average
Source: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 2021d
108 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
down the cost of smartphones, which will themselves be essen-
tial in making education and healthcare more affordable. This
declining trend will only accelerate as we begin to use technology
such as additive manufacturing (also known as 3D print-
ing), manufacturing products only when they are needed and
close to where they are required (Crane & Marchese, 2015).
Additive manufacturing technology is even making it much
cheaper to put up a building, with various structures around
the world produced in this way in recent years, and one
California company now offering small houses 3D printed in
24 hours for sale (Orrall, 2020).
Another way housing can be made more affordable is
through improved sharing of existing housing. Digital techno­
logy, including the services offered by companies such
as Airbnb and Couchsurfing, make such sharing vastly easier
(Note: A degree of regulation is required to avoid detrimental
impacts on some local housing markets). Despite such prog-
ress, it still costs a fortune to live in places where demand for
housing exceeds the available supply, such as New York and
San Francisco. With UBI, people can choose to live where
housing is more affordable.
In recent years, the city of Detroit gave away houses as
an alternative to demolishing them, and in some rural areas
of the US you can rent a home for as little as a few hundred
dollars per month (Macguire, 2014). In fact, there are around
30 million units renting for less than $600 a month, account-
ing for 25 percent of the national rental stock (The Joint
Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University, 2020). The
most affordable way to do this is to share a place with friends.
This could simply mean having roommates or going as far as
purchasing and fixing up an abandoned village, as friends of
mine have done in Germany. Many people can’t currently take
advantage of these opportunities, since they can’t find a job
ECONOMIC FREEDOM 109
in these locations. By contrast, UBI provides geographic free-
dom. People who want to move would no longer be trapped in
expensive cities just so they can meet their basic needs (often
by holding down multiple jobs).
One large group of people is already free of the constraints
of work: retirees. And sure enough, when many people retire,
they move away from expensive cities to places where real
estate is more affordable. When considering the cost of shel-
ter, rather than analyzing how much people need to pay to live
where they live today, we should therefore look at what the
cost could be in a world that has UBI. Crucially, UBI doesn’t
prevent someone from applying their entire payment to what-
ever rent they are currently paying. That is the great power of
providing cash which is completely fungible, meaning it can
be used to purchase anything (unlike, say, a housing voucher
which could be applied to housing only).
Food is another area where technology stands to offer mas-
sive gains. While some argue that genetically modified foods
hold the key to feeding the planet affordably, other near-term
breakthroughs don’t carry the potential issues that GMOs
pose. Indoor vertical farming, for instance, allows for a pre-
cise delivery of nutrients and light to plants, as well as enabling
huge increases in future productivity through the use of robot-
ics. It also allows food to be grown much nearer to where it is
consumed, reducing the costs associated with transportation.
In the extreme, using new hydroponic systems, lettuce, toma-
toes, and other vegetables can be grown directly in apartments.
Over time, as these innovations progress, they will add up to
significant cost reductions and increases in availability of food.
Technology also promises a dramatic decline in the cost of
education. Over the last decade, the availability of online learn-
ing resources has grown rapidly, including many free platforms,
such as the language learning app Duolingo. In addition to
110 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
online courses such as edX and Khan Academy, there are mil-
lions of blog posts that explain specific topics. And of course,
YouTube is bursting with educational videos on a near-infinite
range of subjects, from sailing to quantum computing.
There is evidence that the exorbitant rise in the cost of col-
lege tuition in the US is beginning to slow. When analyzing
this data, we must remember that there is a huge amount of
inertia in our educational system and job market. Many em-
ployers continue to believe they must hire graduates from the
best universities, which drives up prices for higher education,
with a ripple effect that extends all the way down to private
nursery schools. This year, Google announced that they would
be offering specialized six-month programs for fifty dollars
a month, which they committed to treating as equivalent to
four-year college degrees in their own hiring (Bariso, 2020). It
will be some time before most students turn to free or afford-
able online resources for all their learning needs, but at least
the possibility now exists. The COVID-19 crisis has shown
the potential of online education, with schools all around the
world switching from in-person instruction to remote learning
to prevent the pandemic from spreading faster.
Healthcare is a similar story. Per capita spending in the
United States far exceeds that of other countries, having risen
much more quickly than the rate of inflation for many years,
but that hasn’t translated into better care. For instance, Cuba
has for many years had an almost identical life expectancy to
the US, despite spending less than a tenth of the amount on
healthcare per capita (Hamblin, 2016). Debates have raged as
to whether the Affordable Care Act or other legislative inter-
ventions will decrease healthcare costs or increase insurance
premiums. Regardless of these issues, there are a number of
reasons why we can count on progress in digital technology
bringing down healthcare costs.
ECONOMIC FREEDOM 111
First, digital technology can make prices on medical proce-
dures more transparent, enabling more competition to push
prices down (this could be assisted further by regulation).
Second, with people using technology to track their own health
data, we can live healthier lives and require less care, especially
over the long term. And third, technology will lead to faster
and better diagnosis and treatment. The online medical crowd-
sourcing platform CrowdMed has helped many people whose
conditions previously went undiagnosed or misdiagnosed. The
Human Diagnosis Project (Human Dx) is also working on a
system to help improve the accuracy of diagnoses.
Figure 1 is a platform that lets doctors exchange images
and other observations relating to medical cases, and Flatiron
Health pools data on oncology patients to enable targeted
treatment. In addition, a number of companies are bringing
telemedicine into the app era: HealthTap, Doctor On Demand,
Teladoc Health, and Nurx all promise to dramatically reduce
the cost of delivering care.
You might think that a large proportion of healthcare cost re-
sults from pharmaceuticals rather than doctor visits, but in fact
in the US they account for only a tenth of total health spend-
ing (The American Academy of Actuaries, 2018; OECD, 2019).
12,500
10,000
7,500
5,000
2,500
0
2019
2017
2015
2013
2011
2009
2007
2005
2003
2001
1999
1997
1995
Health Expenditure Per Capita (USD)
OECD Average
United States
Source: OECD, 2021b
112 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
However, technology will likely drive costs down here, too. One
pharma entrepreneur told me about the potential for person-
alized drugs that could dramatically improve the effectiveness
of treatments for a wide range of conditions that account for
large expenses, including many kinds of cancer, motor neuron
disease, and Alzheimer’s. And in the longer term, technolo-
gies such as CRISPR gene editing will give us unprecedented
abilities to fix genetic defects that currently result in large and
ongoing expenses, such as cystic fibrosis (Mosse, 2015).
BUT ISN’T DEFLATION A BAD THING?
You might be confused by my presentation of deflation as a
positive thing. Economists, after all, tend to portray it as an
evil that should be avoided at all costs. They are primarily con-
cerned about growth as measured by GDP, which they argue
makes us all better off.
They assert that if people anticipate that prices will drop,
they will be less likely to spend money, which will decrease
output and lead owners of capital to make fewer investments,
resulting in less innovation and lower employment. That, in
turn, makes people spend even less, causing the economy to
contract further. Economists point to Japan as a country that
has been experiencing deflation and contracting output. To
avoid this scenario, they argue for policies designed to achieve
some amount of inflation, including the Federal Reserve’s so-
called “quantitative easing,” which is intended to expand the
supply of money and thus increase the nominal prices of things.
However, in a world where digital technology drives tech-
nological deflation, this reasoning is flawed. GDP is an increas-
ingly problematic measure of progress because it ignores both
positive and negative externalities. For instance, on the side
ECONOMIC FREEDOM 113
of positive externalities, making education and healthcare
radically cheaper could lower GDP while clearly making peo-
ple better off. A second flaw in economists’ reasoning is that
it assumes technological progress requires growth in paid
production. A great counterexample is open-source software,
which has driven a lot of technological progress outside of the
traditional economic model. Increases in economic, informa-
tional and psychological freedom will allow us to accelerate
the knowledge loop, which is the foundation of the progress
that enables technological deflation.
Technological deflation is what puts society in a position
where UBI becomes both possible and increasingly helpful.
The total price of all the solutions that a person requires to
take care of their needs has already started to decline, and will
be lower still in the future. Technological deflation is what
allows people to break out of the job loop.
UBI IS AFFORDABLE
With all this background information, you might wonder how
much a universal basic income should be. My working proposal
for the United States is $1,000 per month for everyone over the
age of 18, $400 per month for everyone over the age of 12 and
$200 per month for every child. These numbers might seem
low, but bear in mind that the goal of UBI isn’t to make peo-
ple well off—it’s just to allow them to take care of their needs
without being forced into the job loop. Our collective thinking
about the amounts required is muddled because we have mis-
takenly come to embrace the fulfillment of our unlimited wants
instead of focusing on the freedom to find purpose that comes
from being able to take care of our needs. In addition to show-
ing that capital is no longer our binding constraint, this is the
114 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
second crucial reason for the earlier section on re-establishing
a clear distinction between wants and needs. We should also
remember that technological deflation will make fulfilling our
needs progressively cheaper, while UBI won’t be introduced
overnight. My numbers are intended to work over time, as
some other government programs are phased out and UBI is
phased in.
Let’s consider these numbers further. While everyone will
spend their UBI in different ways, a possible allocation for an
adult might break down roughly as follows on a monthly basis:
$400 for housing, $300 for food, $100 for transportation,
$50 for clothing, and $50 for internet access and associated
equipment, with the balance spent differently each month (for
example, on healthcare as required).
You might wonder why I propose a lower payment for chil-
dren and teenagers. The answer is, first, we can meet many
of their needs more cheaply than we can for adults. And sec-
ond, there is historic evidence that the number of children
people have is partially determined by economics. UBI should
not incentivize adults to have more children, so as to “skim”
their income. That’s especially important because, again, we
want the birth rate to decline globally so we eventually reach
peak population.
When you calculate how much money would be required
to provide UBI in the United States, based on the 2019 popu-
lation, you wind up with an annual figure of about $3 trillion
(U.S. Census Bureau, 2019). While that is a huge sum, it rep-
resents just 14 percent of the economy as measured by GDP
in 2019, and under 8 percent of gross output, which measures
not just final output but also intermediate steps (U.S. Bureau
of Economic Analysis, 2020; Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,
2021e). Where will this money come from? Two sources: gov-
ernment budgets (paid for by taxes) and money creation.
ECONOMIC FREEDOM 115
In the US in 2019, the total revenues of all levels of govern-
ment from taxation and fees were on the order of $5 trillion, so
the money for a UBI could, in theory, come from redirecting
existing budgets (OECD, 2020). There would then be another
$2 trillion of money for critical government activities, such
as law enforcement and national defense (the budget for the
latter was $0.7 trillion in 2019) (“Military Budget of the United
States,” 2020). Setting aside the question of the political pro-
cess that might allow such a reallocation to be accomplished, it
is not ruled out by sheer arithmetic.
UBI would also substantially increase government reve-
nues. At the moment, nearly half of all earners don’t get paid
enough to owe federal income tax. Once people have a UBI,
every dollar earned from work, or from other sources such as
interest or capital gains, could be taxed. For instance, if you
are currently single and earn $10,000 in employment income,
you do not need to file a federal income tax return. With a UBI,
that could be taxed at a rate of 25 percent, generating $2,500 in
tax revenue. This could provide as much as $0.3 trillion based
on a back-of-the-envelope calculation. People who already pay
taxes would of course also effectively be paying back some of
their UBI through these taxes. Applying a 25 percent tax rate
to that group, which would receive roughly half of all UBI pay-
ments, would decrease the required amount by an additional
$0.4 trillion. In other words, the net amount required for a UBI
with a 25 percent federal tax rate applied starting with the first
dollar earned would about $2.3 trillion.
Government revenues can also be expanded in ways that
accomplish other goals. For instance, we should increase taxa-
tion on pollution, in particular greenhouse gas emissions. Taxes
are a well-established way of dealing with negative externalities,
and we have made good use of this effect. Aggressively taxing
cigarettes, for instance, has resulted in diminished consumption,
116 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
and higher gasoline taxes in Europe have contributed to more
efficient cars. Estimates of the potential revenue from a carbon
tax are around $0.3 trillion per year, and might be even higher.
So, between offsets from income tax (which would occur
automatically) and a greenhouse gas tax (which we need any-
way), the funds needed for UBI could be reduced to about
$2 trillion. Though that’s a massive number, social security
and Medicare/Medicaid each cost about $1 trillion. So in the
extreme, UBI could be financed through a massive reallocation
of existing programs.
There is, however, another way to provide much or all of the
money needed for UBI. This solution would require moving
away from today’s banking system, where the power to “create”
money is delegated to banks, to a system where money is issued
directly to people instead. In today’s fractional reserve banking
system, commercial banks extend more credit than they have
deposits, with the Federal Reserve Bank acting as the so-called
lender of last resort. For instance, in the 2008 financial crisis,
the Fed bought up potentially bad assets to provide banks with
liquidity. Europe too has had a policy of “quantitative easing”
(often abbreviated as QE), where a central bank infuses large
amounts of money directly into commercial banks through
loans and asset purchases on highly favorable terms in the hope
that the banks in turn will use this money to extend loans.
The idea is that by extending loans to businesses that need
to finance the purchase of equipment or that require more
working capital (to hire more salespeople, for example), banks
will help the economy grow. But while banks have done that
to some degree, they have increasingly focused on lending to
large corporations and to wealthy people, to acquire second
homes or even for financial speculation. Meanwhile, poor peo-
ple have virtually no access to affordable credit, and lending to
small businesses has been decreasing. The net result has been
ECONOMIC FREEDOM 117
a rise in wealth and income inequality. Interestingly, this lop-
sided effect of bank-based money creation was understood as
early as the 18th century in the writings of the French banker
and economist Richard Cantillon, and has become known as
the “Cantillon Effect” (Stoller, 2020).
An alternative system would be to take money creation out
of the hands of banks by forcing them to hold demand deposits
at the Fed, or the corresponding central bank, in other coun-
tries. Known as “full-reserve banking,” this system dramatically
reduces risk in the banking sector by eliminating the possibil-
ity of bank runs and allows for new competitive banks to be
formed without big upfront equity requirements. Credit exten-
sion would take place on the basis of long-term deposits, and
also happen via marketplace lending, as enabled by companies
such as LendingClub, for individuals, and Funding Circle, for
businesses. Money creation would happen simply by giving the
new money directly to people as part of their UBI payments, a
system sometimes referred to as “QE for the people.”
What orders of magnitude are we talking about? The terms
M0, M1, M2, and M3 are progressively more encompassing
measures of how much money has been created in the econ-
omy (meaning M3 is greater than M2, which is greater than
M1, etc.). In the US, we no longer track the larger monetary
aggregates, such as M3, and only use narrower measures, such
as M2, and even that measure has been growing by about
$1 trillion each year over the last decade. Since the beginning
of the COVID-19 crisis, the Federal Reserve has created an
astonishing additional $15 trillion of money as measured by M1.
Another way to get a sense of the total magnitude of money
creation is by considering the development of debt. US house-
holds have about $10 trillion in mortgage debt, over $1.5 tril-
lion in student loans, $1.2 trillion in auto loans, and more than
$900 million in credit card debt (Federal Reserve Bank of
118 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
New York, 2020; Fontinelle, 2021; White, 2021). Total house-
hold debt can increase by as much as $1 trillion in a single
year. US business debt stands at around $35 trillion, about half
of which is in the financial sector (Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis, 2021f; 2021g).
The amount of money created annually is thus in the same
ballpark as my proposed UBI. Historically, the idea of the
government “printing” money is associated with fears of run-
away inflation of the sort that occurred in Germany’s Weimar
Republic. There are several reasons why this would not be
the case with a proper UBI scheme. First, the amount of new
money created would be fixed and known in advance. Second,
as we saw earlier, technology is a strong deflationary force.
Third, the net amount of money created can be reduced over
time by removing money from the economy, which could be
accomplished through negative interest rates on bank deposits
above a certain amount, with payment collected by the central
bank. Alternatively, a system of “demurrage” could be imple-
mented, in which a fee is levied on all currency holdings or the
holdings are automatically shrunk (with digital currencies, the
latter is now possible automatically).
I expect the path to UBI to involve some combination of
changes to government budgets, taxation, and the monetary
system. As we will see later, it is also possible that UBI emerges
outside of government through a decentralized project using
blockchain technology.
However we wind up getting there, my back-of-the-
envelope calculations above show that UBI is affordable in
the United States today. Similar calculations have been carried
out for other countries and show affordability even in many
less-developed countries. Economic freedom for all is already
within our reach.
ECONOMIC FREEDOM 119
IMPACT OF UBI ON THE LABOR MARKET
One of the many attractive features of UBI is that it doesn’t
remove people’s ability to sell their labor. Suppose someone
offers you $5 per hour to look after their dog. Under UBI, you
are completely free to accept or reject that proposal without
distortion from a minimum wage. The reason we need a minimum
wage in the current system is to guard against exploita-
tion, but this problem exists primarily because people do not
have the option to walk away from exploitive employment.
If UBI was in place, they would.
The example of dog-sitting shows why a minimum wage is
a crude instrument that results in distortion. If you like dogs,
you might happily take the work for $5 per hour. You might be
able to do it while writing a blog post or watching videos on
YouTube. Government should not interfere with such trans-
actions. The same is true of working in a fast food restaurant.
If employees have the option of walking away from a job, the
labor market will naturally find out how much it takes to get
someone to work at, say, McDonalds. That might turn out to
be $5 per hour or it might turn out to be $30 per hour (the
former being exceedingly unlikely for McDonalds but might
be the case for a local burger joint that people love working
at). Finally, with the existence of UBI, labor organizing for
collective bargaining would become easier, as various tactics
currently used by employers rely on the threat of unemploy-
ment and the large demand for even poorly compensated
jobs from the “precariat” (a term used by Guy Standing to
describe the growing group of people who lead a precarious
existence as the result of intermittent employment and other
forms of underemployment).
One concern often expressed about UBI is that people
would stop working altogether and cause the labor market to
120 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
collapse. Experiments with UBI, such as the Manitoba Basic
Annual Income Experiment in Canada in the 1970s, showed
that while people somewhat reduced their working hours
when they were paid such income, there was no dramatic labor
shortage. People will generally want to earn more than their
basic income provides, and the increase in the price of labor
will make working more attractive. Furthermore, in conjunc-
tion with the income tax change discussed in the previous
section, UBI avoids a major issue with many existing welfare
programs in which people lose all their benefits when they
start to work, resulting in effective tax rates above 100 percent
(i.e. people make less working than not). With UBI, whatever
you earn is in addition to your basic income and you pay the
normal marginal tax rate on that. There is no benefit cliff and
hence no disincentive to paid work.
But what about dirty or dangerous jobs? Will there be
a price of labor high enough to motivate anyone to do them,
and will the companies that need this labor be able to stay in
business? Businesses will have a choice between paying people
more to do such work or investing in automation. In all likeli-
hood, the answer will be a combination of both. As we already
saw earlier, expensive labor has historically been a driver of
innovation. Because our ability to automate has gone up dra-
matically with digital technology, we can in fact now automate
these dirty and dangerous jobs. That also means that we do not
have to worry about labor-price induced inflation. Put differ-
ently, technological deflation can continue even if the cost for
some labor increases.
UBI would have three other important impacts on the labor
market. The first has to do with volunteering. Currently, there
are not enough people looking after the environment or taking
care of the sick and elderly. Labor is frequently undersupplied
in these sectors because the demand isn’t backed by enough
ECONOMIC FREEDOM 121
money, and these activities thus rely largely on donations.
Many elderly people don’t have sufficient savings to afford per-
sonal care. When people have to work pretty much every free
hour to meet their needs, they don’t have time to volunteer.
Providing them with UBI could vastly increase the number of
volunteers (we observe increased volunteering among pen-
sioners, who are effectively already on UBI).
The second big effect UBI would have on the labor market
is a dramatic expansion of the scope for entrepreneurial activity.
A lot of people who would like to start a local business,
such as a nail salon or a restaurant, have no financial cushion
and can never quit their jobs to give it a try. I sometimes refer
to UBI as seed money for everyone: More businesses getting
started in a community would mean more opportunities for
fulfilling local employment.
Once they get going, some of these new ventures would re-
ceive traditional financing, including bank loans and venture
capital, but UBI also has the potential to significantly expand
the reach and importance of crowdfunding. If you feel confi-
dent that your needs are taken care of, you will be more likely
to start an activity that has the potential to attract support via
crowdfunding, such as recording music videos and putting
them up on YouTube. Also, if your needs are taken care of, you
will be more likely to use a fraction of any income you receive
on top of UBI to support crowdfunded projects.
The third big impact of UBI on the labor market would be
the growth of human qua human jobs (credit for this concept
goes to Yochai Benkler, who mentioned it to me in conversa-
tion). There are certain jobs that, even when we can automate
them, we will sometimes have a preference for a human in-
stead. Examples of these include food preparation and serv-
ing, massage and mental health therapy, and of course arts
and crafts. A great example for this desire is the persistence
122 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
and even growth of live music following the invention of
sound recording. There is something special about a perfor-
mance that results from a sense of shared humanity. It is our
intuitive understanding that the performer has an inner life of
thoughts and emotions akin to our own that makes live music
special. Conversely it can be highly pleasurable to perform for
somebody or to cook a meal for someone. UBI will greatly in-
crease the room for people to participate on both sides of these
human qua human labor markets.
OTHER OBJECTIONS TO UBI
I have addressed the three biggest objections to UBI by show-
ing that it is affordable, that it will not result in inflation, and
that it will have a positive impact on the labor market and
innovation. There are some other common objections that are
worth addressing, including a moral objection that people have
done nothing to deserve such an income, which is answered in
its own section below.
One other objection to UBI is that it diminishes the value
of work in society. In fact, the opposite is true: UBI recognizes
how much unpaid work exists in the world, including child
rearing. We have created a situation where the word “work”
has become synonymous with getting paid. As things stand,
if you don’t get paid for doing something, it’s not considered
work. An example of another approach is the one taken by
Montessori schools, which base their teaching on creativity
and problem-solving: they use “work” to refer to any “purpose-
ful activity.”
A further objection is that UBI robs people of the sense of
purpose that work provides if they stop working or stop look-
ing for work. However, the idea of work as a source of human
ECONOMIC FREEDOM 123
purpose is a relatively new one, and it is largely attributable to
the Protestant work ethic.
Earlier, human purpose tended to be rooted in religion,
which offered meaning in return for adhering to certain pre-
cepts (those might include work as one of several command-
ments, but not as a source of purpose in itself). The source of
human purpose is thus subject to redefinition over time. As we
transition to the Knowledge Age, contributing to or sustain-
ing the knowledge loop is a more suitable focus. So is carrying
out the responsibilities that we as humans have because of the
power that knowledge has given to us.
One other frequent objection is that people will spend their
basic income on alcohol and drugs, an assertion often accom-
panied by claims that the casino money received by Native
Americans has caused drug problems among that population.
There is no evidence to support this objection: No UBI pilots
have found a significant increase in drug or alcohol abuse, and
in the meantime the opioid crisis has been the largest drug epidemic
in US history. Research shows that, contrary to popu-
lar belief, casino money has contributed to declines in obesity,
smoking, and heavy drinking (Wolfe et al., 2012).
Some people object to UBI not because they think it won’t
work, but because they claim it is a cynical ploy by the rich
to silence the poor and keep them from rebelling. Some who
voice this criticism genuinely believe it, but others use it as
a tool of political division. Whatever the case, the impact of
UBI is likely to be the opposite, as Thomas Paine recognized.
In many parts of the world, including the United States, the
poor are effectively excluded from the political process. They
are too busy holding down one or more jobs to be able to run
for office—or sometimes even to vote. American elections are
held on a weekday, and employers are not required to give
employees time off work to go to the polling station.
124 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Outside of elections, many democratic processes, such as
organizing protests or even strikes rely on people who can
contribute time to the effort. UBI will dramatically improve
the ability of people to engage this way and thus challenge the
status quo.
UBI AS A MORAL IMPERATIVE
Before we examine informational freedom, we should remind
ourselves why individuals deserve to have enough to take care
of their needs, regardless of any economic contributions they
may have made.
Consider the air we breathe. None of us did anything to
make it, we just inherited it from the planet. Similarly, no
one who is alive today did anything to invent electricity. It
had already been invented, and we have inherited its benefits.
You might point out that electricity costs money and people
have to pay for it, but they pay for the cost of producing it
rather than the cost of its invention. Here we might substitute
many other amazing examples of our collectively inherited
human knowledge, such as antibiotics, the wheel, sliced bread,
and so on.
We are incredibly fortunate to have been born into a world
where capital is no longer scarce. This means that using our
knowledge to take care of everyone’s needs is a moral imper-
ative. UBI accomplishes that by giving people economic free-
dom, allowing them to escape the job loop, and accelerating
the knowledge loop that gave us this incredible knowledge in
the first place.
INFORMATIONAL FREEDOM 125
17. Informational Freedom
Can you read any book you want to at the push of a button?
Can you listen to any music ever recorded the moment you feel
like it? Do you have instant access to any academic publication
from around the world that you wish to consult? In the past,
when copying and distributing information was expensive, ask-
ing such seemingly outrageous questions would not have made
any sense. In the early days of writing, when books were cop-
ied by hand, they were rare, costly, and subject to errors. Very
few people had access to them. And even as recently as the
last years of the 20th century, it typically took physically costly
processes of production and distribution to get books, musical
recordings, and other items into people’s hands.
But in the digital age, when the marginal cost of making
and distributing a copy has shrunk to zero, all limitations on
digital information are artificial. They involve adding costs to
the system in order to impose scarcity on something that is
abundant. For example, billions of dollars have been spent on
preventing people from copying and sharing digital music files
(CBS News, 2001).
Why are we spending money to make information less accessible?
When information existed only in analog form, the cost
of copying and distributing it allowed us to build an economy
and a society that was based on information scarcity. A record
label, for instance, had to recruit musical talent, record in
expensive studios, market the music, and make and distribute
physical records. Charging for the records allowed the label to
cover its costs and turn a profit. Now that individuals can make
music on a laptop and distribute it for free, the fixed costs are
dramatically lower and the marginal cost of each listen is zero.
126 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
In this context, the business model of charging per record, per
song, or per listen—and the copyright protections required to
sustain it—no longer make sense. Despite the ridiculous fight
put up by the music industry, our listening is generally either
free (meaning that it is ad-supported) or part of a subscription.
In either case, the marginal cost of each listen is zero.
Despite this progress in the music industry, we accept many
other artificial restrictions on information access because this
is the only system we know. To transition into the Knowledge
Age, however, we should strive for an increase in informational
freedom. This is not unprecedented in human history: Prior to
the advent of the printing press, stories and music were passed
on orally or through copying by hand. There were no restric-
tions on who could tell a story or perform a song.
To be clear, information is not the same as knowledge.
Information, for instance, includes the huge number of log files
generated every day by computers around the world, many of
which may never be analyzed. We don’t know in advance what
information will turn out to be the basis for knowledge, so it
makes sense to retain as much information as possible and
make access to it as broad as possible. This section will explore
various ways in which we can expand informational freedom,
the second important step that will facilitate our transition to
a Knowledge Age.
ACCESS TO THE INTERNET
The internet has been derided by some who claim it is a small
innovation compared to, say, electricity or vaccinations—but
they are mistaken. The internet allows anyone, anywhere in the
world, to learn how electricity or vaccinations work. Setting
aside artificial limitations imposed on the flow of information,
INFORMATIONAL FREEDOM 127
the internet provides the means to access and distribute all
human knowledge to all of humanity. As such, it is the crucial
enabler of the digital knowledge loop. Access to the internet is
a core component of informational freedom.
At present, over four and a half billion people are connected
to the internet, a number that is increasing by hundreds of mil-
lions every year (Kemp, 2020). This tremendous growth has
become possible because the cost of access has fallen dramat-
ically. A capable smartphone costs less than $100 to manufacture.
In places with competitive markets, 4G bandwidth is
provided at prices as low as $0.10 per gigabyte (Roy, 2019).
Even connecting people who live in remote parts of the
world is getting much cheaper, as the cost for wireless net-
working is decreasing and we are increasing our satellite capac-
ity. For instance, there is a project underway to connect rural
communities in Mexico for less than $10,000 per community
(Rostad, 2018). At the same time, in highly developed econo-
mies such as the US, ongoing technological innovation such as
MIMO wireless technology will further lower prices for band-
width in densely populated urban areas (“MIMO,” 2020).
All of this means that even at relatively low levels, UBI
would cover the cost of internet access, provided that we
keep innovating and maintain highly competitive and properly
regulated markets for access to it. This is an example of how
the three different freedoms reinforce each other: Economic
freedom allows people to access the internet, which is the
foundation for informational freedom, and, as we will see later,
using it to contribute to the knowledge loop requires psycho-
logical freedom.
As we work to make affordable internet access universal, we
must also address limitations to the flow of information on
the network. In particular, we should fight against restrictions
on the internet imposed by governments and internet service
128 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
providers (ISPs). Both are artificial limitations, driven by a
range of economic and policy considerations opposed to the
imperative of informational freedom.
ONE GLOBAL INTERNET
By design, the internet has no built-in concept of geography.
Most fundamentally, it constitutes a way to connect networks
with one another (hence its name), regardless of where the
machines involved are located. Any geographic restrictions
have been added in, often at great cost. Australia and the UK
have recently mandated so-called “firewalls” around their
countries, not unlike China’s own “Great Firewall” (“Great
Firewall,” 2020), and countries like Turkey have had one in
place for some time. These firewalls place the internet under
government control, restricting informational freedom. For
instance, Wikipedia was not accessible in Turkey for many
years. Furthermore, both China and Russia have banned the
use of virtual private network services, tools that allow individ-
uals to circumvent these artificial restrictions (Wenger, 2017a).
As citizens, we should be outraged that governments are cut-
ting us off from accessing information freely around the world,
both on principle and on the basis of this being a bad use of
resources. Imagine governments in an earlier age spending tax-
payer money so citizens could dial fewer phone numbers.
NO ARTIFICIAL FAST AND SLOW LANES
The same equipment used by governments to impose geo-
graphic boundaries on the internet is used by ISPs to extract
more money from customers, distorting access in the process
INFORMATIONAL FREEDOM 129
through practices including paid prioritization and zero-rating.
To understand why they are a problem, let’s take a brief tech-
nical detour.
When you buy access to the internet, you pay for a connec-
tion of a certain capacity. If it provides 10 megabits per second
and you use that connection fully for sixty seconds, you would
have downloaded (or uploaded, for that matter) 600 megabits,
the equivalent of 15–25 songs on Spotify or SoundCloud (assum-
ing 3–5 megabytes per song). The fantastic thing about digital
information is that all bits are the same. It doesn’t matter
whether you accessed Wikipedia or looked at pictures of kittens:
You’ve paid for the bandwidth, and you should be free to use it
to access whatever parts of human knowledge you want.
That principle, however, doesn’t maximize profit for the ISP.
In order to do that, they seek to discriminate between different
types of information, based on consumer demand and the sup-
plier’s ability to pay. First they install equipment that lets them
identify bits based on their origin. Then they go to a company
like YouTube or Netflix and ask them to pay to have their traffic
prioritized relative to traffic from other sources. Another form
of manipulation that is common among wireless providers is
so-called zero-rating, where some services pay to be excluded
from monthly bandwidth caps. If permitted, ISPs will go a step
further: In early 2017, the US Senate voted to allow them to sell
customer data, including browsing history, without customer
consent (Wenger, 2017b).
The regulatory solution to this problem is blandly referred
to as “net neutrality,” but what is at stake here is informational
freedom itself. Our access to human knowledge should not be
skewed by our ISP’s financial incentives. We might consider
switching to another ISP that provides neutral access, but in
most geographic areas, especially in the United States, there
is no competitive market for broadband internet access. ISPs
130 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
either have outright monopolies (often granted by regulators)
or operate in small oligopolies. For instance, in the part of
New York City where I live, there is just one broadband ISP.
Over time, technological advances such as wireless broad-
band may make the market more competitive, but until then
we need regulation to avoid ISPs limiting our informational
freedom. This concern is shared by people all over the world:
in 2016, India objected to a plan by Facebook to provide
subsidized internet access that would have given priority
to their own services, and outlawed zero-rating altogether
(Vincent, 2016).
BOTS FOR ALL OF US
Once you have access to the internet, you need software to con-
nect to its many information sources. When Tim Berners-Lee
first invented the World Wide Web in 1989, he specified an
open protocol, the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), that
anyone could use both to make information available and to
access it (“Tim Berners-Lee,” n.d.). In doing this, Berners-Lee
enabled anyone to build software, so-called Web servers and
browsers that would be compatible with this protocol. Many
people did, including Marc Andreessen with Netscape, and
many web servers and browsers were available as open-source
or for free.
The combination of an open protocol and free software
meant permissionless publishing and complete user control. If
you wanted to add a page to the Web, you could just download
a Web server, run it on a computer connected to the internet
and add content in the HyperText Markup Language (HTML)
format. Not surprisingly, the amount of content on the Web
proliferated rapidly. Want to post a picture of your cat? Upload
INFORMATIONAL FREEDOM 131
it to your Web server. Want to write something about the latest
progress on your research project? There was no need to con-
vince an academic publisher of its merits—you could just put
up a web page.
People accessing the Web benefited from their ability to
completely control their own Web browser. In fact, in the
HyperText Transfer Protocol, the Web browser is referred to
as a “user agent’” that accesses the Web on behalf of the user.
Want to see the raw HTML as delivered by the server? Right
click on your screen and use “View Page Source.” Want to see
only text? Instruct your user agent to turn off all images. Want
to fill out a web form but keep a copy of what you are submit-
ting for yourself? Create a script to have your browser save all
form submissions locally.
Over time, the platforms that have increasingly dominated
the Web have interfered with some of the freedom and auton-
omy enjoyed by early users. I went on Facebook recently to
find a note I posted some time ago on a friend’s wall. But it
turns out that you can’t search through all the wall posts you
have written: Instead, you have to scroll backwards in time for
each friend, trying to remember when you posted what where.
Facebook has all the data, but they’ve decided not to make it
searchable. Whether or not you attribute this to intentional
misconduct on their part, my point is that you experience
Facebook the way they want you to experience it. If you don’t
like how Facebook’s algorithms prioritize your friends’ posts in
your newsfeed, tough luck.
Imagine what would happen if everything you did on
Facebook was mediated by a software program—a bot—that
you could control. You could instruct it to go through and au-
tomate the cumbersome steps that Facebook lays out for find-
ing old wall posts. Even better, if you had been using this bot
all along, it could have kept your own archive of wall posts in
132 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
your own data store and you could simply instruct it to search
your archive. If we all used bots to interact with Facebook and
didn’t like how our newsfeed was prioritized, we could ask our
friends to instruct their bots to send us status updates directly
so that we could form our own feeds. This was entirely possi-
ble on the Web because of the open protocol, but it is not pos-
sible in a world of proprietary and closed apps on smartphones.
Although this example might sound trivial, bots have pro-
found implications in a networked world. Consider the on-demand
car services provided by companies such as Uber and
Lyft. As drivers for these services know, each of them provides
a separate app for them to use. You can try to run both apps on
one phone or you can even have two phones, as some drivers
do, but the closed nature of the apps means that you cannot
use your phone’s computing power to evaluate competing of-
fers. If you had access to bots that could interact with the net-
works on your behalf, you could simultaneously participate in
these various marketplaces and play one off against the other.
Using a bot, you could set your own criteria for which rides
you want to accept, including whether a commission charged
by a given network was below a certain threshold. The bot
would then allow you to accept only rides that maximize the
fare you receive. Ride-sharing companies would no longer be
able to charge excessive commissions, since new networks
could arise to undercut them. Similarly, as a passenger, using
a bot would allow you to simultaneously evaluate the prices
between different services and choose the one with the lowest
price for a particular trip.
We could also use bots as an alternative to antitrust regu-
lation to counter the power of technology giants like Google
or Facebook without foregoing the benefits of their large net-
works. These companies derive much of their revenue from
advertising, and consumers currently have no way of blocking
INFORMATIONAL FREEDOM 133
ads on mobile devices. But what if users could control mobile
apps to add ad-blocking functionality, just as they can with
Web browsers?
Many people decry ad-blocking as an attack on journalism
that dooms the independent Web, but that is a pessimistic
view. In the early days of the Web, it was full of ad-free con-
tent published by individuals. When companies joined in, they
brought their offline business models with them, including
paid subscriptions and advertising. Along with the emergence
of platforms such as Facebook and Twitter with strong net-
work effects, this resulted in a centralization of the Web—con-
tent was increasingly either produced on a platform or moved
behind a paywall.
Ad-blocking is an assertion of power by the end user, which
is a good thing in all respects. Just as a New York City judge
found in 2015 that taxi companies have no special right to see
their business model protected from ride-sharing companies
(Whitford, 2015), neither do ad-supported publishers. And
while this might result in a downturn for publishers in the
short term, in the long run it will mean more growth for con-
tent that is paid for more directly by end users (for example,
through subscriptions or crowdfunding).
To curtail the centralizing power of network effects, we
should shift power to the end users by allowing them to have
user agents for mobile apps, just as we did with the Web. The
reason users don’t wield the same power on mobile is that
native apps relegate end users to interacting with services using
our eyes, ears, brain, and fingers. We cannot use the comput-
ing capabilities of our smartphones, which are as powerful as
supercomputers were until quite recently, in order to interact
with the apps on our behalf. The apps control us, instead of us
controlling the apps. Like a Web browser, a mobile user agent
could do things such as block ads, keep copies of responses to
134 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
services, and let users participate in multiple services simulta-
neously. The way to help end users is not to break up big tech
companies, but to empower individuals to use code that exe-
cutes on their behalf.
What would it take to make this a reality? One approach
would be to require companies like Uber, Google and Facebook
to expose their functionality, not just through apps and web-
sites, but also through so-called application programming in-
terfaces (APIs). An API is what a bot uses to carry out opera­
tions, such as posting a status update on a user’s behalf.
Companies such as Facebook and Twitter have them, but they
tend to have limited capabilities. Also, companies have the
right to shut down bots, even when a user has authorized them
to act on their behalf.
Why can’t I simply write code that interfaces with Facebook
on my behalf? After all, Facebook’s app itself uses an API to
talk to the Facebook servers. But to do that, I would have to
hack the Facebook app to figure out what the API calls are
and how to authenticate myself to them. Unfortunately, in
the US there are three separate laws that make those steps
illegal. The first is the anti-circumvention provision of the
Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA). The second is the
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA). And the third is the
legal construction that by clicking “I accept” on an end-user
license agreement (EULA) or a set of Terms of Service (TOS),
I am legally bound to respect whatever restrictions Facebook
decides to impose. The last of these three is a civil matter, but
criminal convictions under the first two laws carry mandatory
prison sentences.
If we were willing to remove these three legal obstacles,
hacking an app to give programmatic access to systems would
be possible. People might argue that those provisions were
created to solve important problems, but that is not entirely
INFORMATIONAL FREEDOM 135
clear. The anti-circumvention provision of the DMCA was put
in place to allow the creation of digital rights management
systems for copyright enforcement. What you think of this
depends on what you think about copyright, a subject we will
look at in the next section.
The scope of the CFAA could be substantially decreased
without limiting its potential for prosecuting fraud and abuse,
and the same goes for restrictions on usage a company might
impose via a license agreement or terms of service. If I only
take actions that are also available inside the company’s app
but happen to take them via a program of my own choice, why
should that constitute a violation?
But, you might object, don’t companies need to protect the
cryptographic keys that they use to encrypt communications?
Aren’t “botnets” behind those infamous distributed denial-
of-service (DDoS) attacks, where vast networks of computers
flood a service with so many requests that no one can access it?
It’s true that there are a lot of compromised machines in the
world that are used for nefarious purposes, including set-top
boxes and home routers.
But that only demonstrates how ineffective the existing
laws are at stopping illegal bots. As a result, companies have
developed the technological infrastructure to deal with them.
How would we prevent people from using bots that turn out
to be malicious code? For one, open-source code would allow
people to inspect it to make sure it does what it claims.
However, open source is not the only answer. Once
people can legally be represented by bots, many markets cur-
rently dominated by large companies will face competition
from smaller startups that will build, operate, and maintain
these bots on behalf of their end users. These companies
will compete in part on establishing and maintaining a trust
relationship with their customers, much like an insurance
136 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
broker represents a customer in relationship with multiple
insurance carriers.
Legalizing representation by bots would put pressure on
the revenues of the currently dominant companies. We might
worry that they would respond by slowing their investment
in infrastructure, but there are contravening forces as more
money will be invested in competitors. For example, Uber’s
“take rate” (the percentage of the money paid for rides that
they keep) is 25 percent. If competition forced that rate down
to 5 percent, Uber’s value might fall from $90 billion to $10 bil-
lion, but that is still a huge figure, and plenty of capital would
be available for investing in competitive companies that can
achieve that kind of outcome.
That is not to say that there should not be limitations on
bots. A bot representing me should have access to any func-
tionality that I can access, but it should not be able to do things
I can’t do, such as pretend to be another user or gain access to
other people’s private posts.
Companies can use technology to enforce such access
limits for bots without relying on regulation that prevents bot
representation in general.
Even if you are now convinced of the merits of bots, you
might be wondering how we will get there. The answer is that
we can start very small. We could run an experiment in a city
like New York, where the city’s municipal authorities control
how on-demand transportation services operate. They might
say, “If you want to operate here, you have to let drivers interact
with your service through a program.” Given how big a
market the city is, I’m confident these services would agree.
Eventually we could mandate APIs for all internet services
that have more than some threshold number of users, includ­­
ing all the social networks and even the big search platforms,
such as Google.
INFORMATIONAL FREEDOM 137
To see that this is possible in principle, one need look no
further than the UK’s Open Banking and the European Union’s
Payment Services Directive, which require banks to offer an
API for bank accounts (Manthorpe, 2018). This means that
consumers can access third-party services, such as bill pay-
ment and insurance, by authorizing them to have access via the
API instead of having to open a new account with a separate
company. This dramatically lowers switching costs and is mak-
ing the market for financial services more competitive. The
ACCESS Act, introduced by Senators Mark Warner and Josh
Hawley in the US, was the first attempt to provide a similar
concept for social media companies. While this particular ef-
fort hasn’t gone very far to date, it points to the possibility that
bots could be used as an important alternative to Industrial
Age antitrust regulation for shifting power back to end users.
LIMITING THE LIMITS TO SHARING
AND CREATING
After we have fought against geographical and prioritization
limits and have bots that represent us online, we will still face
legal limits that restrict what we can create and share. I will
first examine copyright and patent laws and suggest ways to
reduce how much they limit the knowledge loop. Then I’ll turn
to privacy laws.
Earlier, I noted how expensive it was to make copies of
books when they had to be copied one letter at a time. Even-
tually, the printing press and movable type were invented.
Together, the two made reproducing information faster and
cheaper. Even back then, governments and churches saw
cheaper information dissemination as a threat to their author-
ity. In England, the Licensing of the Press Act of 1662 made the
138 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
government’s approval to operate a printing press a legal re-
quirement (Nipps, 2014). This approval depended on agreeing
to censor content that was critical of the government or that
ran counter to the teachings of the Church of England. The origins
of copyright laws (i.e., the legal right to make copies) are
thus tied up with censorship.
Those who had the right to make copies effectively had
monopolies on the copyrighted content which proved to be
economically attractive. Censorship, however, does not make
for a popular argument to support an ongoing monopoly, and
so relatively quickly the argument for sustaining such an ar-
rangement shifted to the suggestion that copyright was neces-
sary as an inducement or incentive to produce content in the
first place. The time and effort authors put into learning and
writing not only made written works morally their property,
the writer Daniel Defoe and others argued in the early 18th cen-
tury: To motivate people to do those things, the production of
“pyrated copies” had to be stopped (Deazley, 2004). While this
argument sounds much more compelling than censorship, in
practice, copyright was rarely held by the original creator even
back then. Instead, the economic benefits of copyright have
largely accrued to publishers, who for the most part acquire the
copyright for a one-time payment to the author or songwriter.
There is another problem with the incentive argument. It
ignores a long history of prior content creation. Let’s take music
as an example. Musical instruments were made as far back as
30,000 years ago, pre-dating the idea of copyright by many mil-
lennia. Even the earliest known encoding of a song, which marks
music’s transition from information to knowledge, is around
3,400 years old (Andrews, 2018; Wulstan, 1971). Clearly then,
people made and shared music long before copyright existed.
In fact, the period during which it’s been possible for someone
to earn a lot of money from making and then selling recorded
INFORMATIONAL FREEDOM 139
music has been extraordinarily short. It started with the inven-
tion of the gramophone in the 1870s and peaked in 1999, the
year that saw the biggest profits in the music industry, although
the industry’s revenues have been gradually increasing again in
recent years with the advent of streaming (Smith, 2020).
Before this short period, musicians made a living either
from live performances or through patronage. If copyrighted
music ceased to exist, musicians would still compose, perform,
and record music, and they would make money in the ways that
they did prior to the rise of copyright. Indeed, as Steven Johnson
found when he examined this issue, that is already happening
to some degree: “The decline in recorded-music revenue has
been accompanied by an increase in revenues from live music
(…) Recorded music, then, becomes a kind of marketing ex-
pense for the main event of live shows” (Johnson, 2015). Many
musicians already choose to give away digital versions of their
music, releasing tracks for free on SoundCloud or YouTube
and making money from performing live (which during the
COVID-19 pandemic had to shift to live streaming) or through
crowdfunding methods such as Kickstarter and Patreon.
Over time, copyright holders have strengthened their claims
and extended their reach. For instance, with the passing of the
US Copyright Act of 1976, the requirement to register a copy-
right was removed: If you created content, you automatically
held copyright in it (U.S. Copyright Office, 2019). Then, in 1998,
the US Copyright Term Extension Act extended the length of
a term of copyright from 50 to 70 years beyond the life of the
author. This became known as the “Mickey Mouse Protection
Act” because Disney had lobbied for it: Having built a profitable
business based on protected content, they were mindful that a
number of their copyrights were due to expire (Slaton, 1999).
More recently, copyright lobbying has attempted to inter-
fere with the publication of content on the internet, through
140 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
proposed legislation such as the Protect IP Act and the Stop
Online Piracy Act, and language in the Trans-Pacific Partner-
ship (TPP), a trade deal that the United States did not ultimately
join (after the United States withdrew, the language was
removed). In these latest attempts at expansion, the conflict
between copyright and the digital knowledge loop has become
especially clear. Copyright limits what you can do with content
that you have access to, essentially restricting you to consum-
ing it. It dramatically curtails your ability to share content and
to create other works that use some or all of it. Some of the
more extreme examples include takedowns of videos from
YouTube that used the song “Happy Birthday to You,” which
was under copyright until just a few years ago.
From a societal standpoint, it is never optimal to pre-
vent someone from listening to or watching content that has
already been created. Since the marginal cost of accessing a
digital copy is zero, the world is better off if that person gets
enjoyment from that content. And if that person becomes
motivated to create some new inspiring content themselves,
then the world is a lot better off.
Although the marginal cost for copying content is zero, you
might wonder about the fixed and variable cost that goes into
making it in the first place. If all content were to be free, then
where would the money to produce it come from? Some de-
gree of copyright is needed for content creation, especially for
large-scale projects such as Hollywood movies or elaborate
video games: It is likely that nobody would make them if, in
the absence of copyright protection, they weren’t economi-
cally viable. Yet even for such big projects there should be con-
straints on enforcement. For instance, you shouldn’t be able to
take down an entire service because it hosts a link to a pirated
movie, as long as the link is promptly removed. More gener-
ally, I believe that copyright should be dramatically reduced in
INFORMATIONAL FREEDOM 141
scope and made much more costly to obtain. The only auto-
matic right accruing to content should be attribution. Reserv-
ing additional rights should require a registration fee, because
you are asking for content to be restricted within the digital
knowledge loop.
Imagine a situation where the only automatic right accruing
to an intellectual work was attribution. Anyone wanting to copy
or distribute your song would only have to credit you, some-
thing that would not inhibit any part of the knowledge loop.
Attribution imposes no restrictions on making, accessing and
distributing copies, or on creating or sharing derivative works.
It can include referencing who wrote the lyrics, who composed
the music, who played which instrument and so on. It can also
include where you found this particular piece of music. This
practice of attribution is already becoming popular for digital
text and images using the Creative Commons License, or the
MIT License in open-source software development.
If you don’t want other people to use your music without
paying you, you are asking for its potential contributions to
the knowledge loop to be restricted, thus reducing the bene-
fits that the loop confers upon society. You should pay for that
right, which not only represents a loss to society but will also
be costly to enforce. The registration fee should be paid on a
monthly or annual basis, and when you stop paying it, your
work should revert to attribution-only status.
In order to reserve rights, you should have to register your
music with a registry, with some part of the copyright fee
going towards maintaining the registry. Thanks to blockchains,
which allow the operation of decentralized databases that are
not owned or controlled by any one entity, there can be com-
peting registries that access the same global database. The reg-
istries would be free to search, and registration would involve
a check that you are not trying to register someone else’s work.
142 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
The registries could be built in a way that anyone operating a
music streaming service, such as Spotify or SoundCloud, could
easily implement compliance to make sure they are not freely
sharing music that has reserved rights.
It would even be possible to make the registration fee
dependent on what rights you wanted to retain. For instance,
your fee might be lower if you were prepared to allow non-com-
mercial use of your music and to allow others to create deriv-
ative works, while it might increase significantly if you wanted
all your rights reserved. Similar systems could be used for all
types of content, including text, images and video.
Critics might object that the system would impose a finan-
cial burden on creators, but it is important to remember that
removing content from the knowledge loop imposes a cost on
society. And enforcing this removal, by finding people who
are infringing and penalizing them, incurs additional costs for
society. For these reasons, asking creators to pay is fair, espe-
cially if their economic freedom is already assured by UBI.
UBI also provides an answer to another argument that is
frequently wielded in support of excessive copyright: employ-
ment by publishers. This argument is relatively weak, as the
major music labels combined employ only a little over twenty
thousand people (“Sony Music,” n.d.; “Universal Music Group,”
n.d.; “Warner Music Group,” n.d.). On top of that, the existence
of this employment to some degree reflects the societal cost
of copyright. The owners, managers, and employees of record
labels are, for the most part, not the creators of the music.
Let me point out one more reason why a system of paid reg-
istration makes sense. No intellectual works are created in a
vacuum. All authors have read books by other people, all musicians
have listened to tons of music, and all filmmakers have
watched countless movies. Much of what makes art so enjoy-
able is the existence of a vast body of art that it draws upon and
INFORMATIONAL FREEDOM 143
can reference, whether explicitly or implicitly. We are all part
of the knowledge loop that has existed for millennia.
While copyright limits our ability to share knowledge,
patents limit our ability to use knowledge to create something
new. Just as having a copyright confers a monopoly on the
reproduction of content, a patent confers a monopoly on its
application. The rationale for patents is similar to the argument
for copyright: The monopoly that is granted results in
profits that are supposed to provide an incentive for people to
invest in research and development.
Here, as with copyright, this incentive argument should
be viewed with suspicion. People invented things long before
patents existed, and many have continued to invent without
seeking them (Kinsella, 2013). Mathematics is a great example
of the power of intrinsic motivation; that is, the drive to do
something for its own sake, and not because it will be finan-
cially rewarded. People who might have otherwise spent their
time in a more lucrative way often dedicate years of their lives
to work on a single mathematical problem (frequently with-
out success). It is because of the intrinsic human drive to solve
problems that the field has made extraordinary advances, entirely
in the absence of patents, which thankfully were never
extended to include mathematical formulas and proofs. As we
will see momentarily, this problem-solving drive can and has
been successfully amplified through other means.
The first patent system was established in Venice in the
mid-fifteenth century, and Britain had a fairly well-established
system by the seventeenth (“History of Patent Law,” 2020).
That leaves thousands of years of invention, a time that saw
such critical breakthroughs as the alphabet, movable type, and
the invention of the wheel and gears. This is to say nothing
of those inventors who have chosen not to patent their inven-
tions because they saw how that would impose a loss on society.
144 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
A well-known example is Jonas Salk, who created the polio
vaccine. Other important inventions that were never patented
include X-rays, penicillin and the use of ether as an anesthetic
(Boldrin & Levine, 2010). Since we know that limits on the use
of knowledge impose a cost, we should ask what alternatives to
patents exist which might stimulate innovation.
Many people are motivated by wanting to solve a prob-
lem, whether it’s one they have themselves or something that
impacts the world at large. With UBI, more of these people
will be able to spend their time on inventing. We will also
see more innovation because digital technologies are reduc-
ing the cost of inventing. One example of this is the company
Science Exchange, which has created a marketplace for labo-
ratory experiments. Say you have an idea that requires you to
sequence a bunch of genes. The fastest gene sequencing avail-
able is from a company called Illumina, whose fastest machines
used to cost more than $0.5 million (Next Gen Seek, 2021).
Through Science Exchange, however, you can access such a
machine for less than $1,000 per use (“Illumina Next Gener-
ation Sequencing,” 2021). Furthermore, the next generation
of sequencing machines is on the way, and these will further
reduce the cost—technological deflation at work.
A lot of legislation has significantly inflated the cost of
innovation. In particular, FDA rules around drug trials have
made drug discovery prohibitively expensive, with the cost
of bringing a drug to market exceeding $1 billion. While it is
obviously important to protect patients, there are novel statis-
tical techniques that would allow for smaller and faster trials
(Berry et al., 2010). A small step was taken recently with the
compassionate use of not-yet-approved drugs for terminally
ill patients. Excessive medical damage claims have presented
another barrier to innovation. As a result of these costs, many
drugs are either not developed at all or are withdrawn from the
INFORMATIONAL FREEDOM 145
market, despite their efficacy. For example, the vaccine against
Lyme disease, Lymerix, is no longer available for humans
following damage claims (Willyard, 2019).
Patents are not the only way to incentivize innovation.
Another historically successful strategy has been the offering
of prizes. In 1714, Britain famously offered rewards to encour-
age a solution to the problem of determining a ship’s longitude
at sea. Several people were awarded prizes for their designs
of chronometers, lunar distance tables, and other methods
for determining longitude, including improvements to exist-
ing methods. Mathematics provides an interesting example
of the effectiveness of prizes, which beyond money also pro-
vide recognition. In addition to the coveted Fields Medal for
exceptional work by mathematicians under the age of 40, there
are also the seven so-called Millennium Prize Problems, each
with a $1 million reward (only one of which has been solved to
date—and Grigori Perelman, the Russian mathematician who
solved it, famously turned down the prize money opting only
for the recognition).
At a time when we wish to accelerate the knowledge loop,
we must shift the balance toward knowledge that can be used
freely. The success of recent prize programs, such as the X Prizes,
the DARPA Grand Challenge, and NIST competitions, is
promising, and the potential exists to crowdfund future prizes.
Medical research should be a particular target for prizes to
help bring down the cost of healthcare.
Though prizes can help accelerate the knowledge loop, that
still leaves a lot of existing patents in place. I believe much
can be done to make the system more functional, in partic-
ular by reducing the impact of so-called non-practicing enti-
ties (NPEs, commonly referred to as “patent trolls”). These
companies have no operating business of their own, and exist
solely for the purpose of litigating patents. They tend to sue
146 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
not just a company but also that company’s customers, forc-
ing a lot of companies into a quick settlement. The NPE then
uses the settlement money to finance further lawsuits. Fortu-
nately, a recent Supreme Court ruling placed limits on where
patent lawsuits can be filed, which might curtail the activity of
NPEs (Liptak, 2017).
As a central step in patent reform, we must make it easier
to invalidate existing patents, while at the same time making
it more difficult to obtain new ones. We have seen some prog-
ress on both counts in the US, but there is still a long way to
go. Large parts of what is currently patentable should be ex-
cluded from patentability, including university research that
has received even small amounts of public funding. Universities
have frequently delayed the publication of research in
areas where they have hoped for patents that they could subse-
quently license out, a practice that has a damaging impact on
the knowledge loop.
We have also gone astray in our celebration of patents as
a measure of technological progress, when we should instead
treat them at best as a necessary evil. Ideally, we would roll
back the reach of existing patents and raise the bar for new
ones, while also inducing as much unencumbered innovation
as possible through prizes and social recognition.
GETTING OVER PRIVACY
Copyrights and patents aren’t the only legal limitations that
slow down the digital knowledge loop. We’re also actively cre-
ating new restrictions in the form of well-intentioned privacy
regulations. Not only do these measures restrict informational
freedom, but as I will argue below, in the long run, privacy
is fundamentally incompatible with technological progress.
INFORMATIONAL FREEDOM 147
Instead of clinging to our current conception of privacy, we
therefore need to understand how to be free in a world where
information is widely shared. Privacy has been a strategy for
achieving and protecting freedom. To get over this idea while
staying free, we need to expand economic, informational, and
psychological freedom.
Before I expand on this position, let me first note that
countries and individuals already take dramatically different
approaches to the privacy of certain types of information. For
example, Sweden and Finland have been publishing their citizens’
tax returns for years, and some people, including the
Chief Information Officer and Dean for Technology at Harvard
Medical School, have published their entire medical history on
the internet (Doyle & Scrutton, 2016; Zorabedian, 2015). This
shows that, under certain conditions, it is eminently possible
to publicly share exactly the type of information that some
insist must absolutely remain private. As we will see, such shar-
ing turns out not only to be possible but also extremely useful.
To better understand this perspective, compare the costs
and benefits of keeping information private with the costs and
benefits of sharing it widely. Digital technology is dramati-
cally shifting this trade-off in favor of sharing. Take a radiology
image, for example. Analog X-ray technology produced an
image on a physical film that had to be developed, and could
only be examined by holding it up against a backlight. If you
wanted to protect the information on it, you would put it in
a file and lock it in a drawer. If you wanted a second opinion,
you had to have the file sent to another doctor by mail. That
process was costly, time-consuming, and prone to errors. The
upside of analog X-rays was the ease of keeping the informa-
tion secret; the downside was the difficulty of putting it to use.
Now compare analog X-rays to digital X-rays. You can in-
stantly walk out of your doctor’s office with a copy of the digital
148 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
image on a thumb drive or have it emailed to you, put in a
Dropbox, or shared in some other way via the internet. Thanks
to this technology, you can now get a near-instant second opin-
ion. And if everyone you contacted was stumped, you could
post the image on the internet for everyone to see. A doctor, or
a patient, or simply an astute observer somewhere in the world
may have seen something similar before, even if it is incredibly
rare. This has happened repeatedly via Figure 1, a company that
provides an image-sharing network for medical professionals.
But this power comes at a price: Protecting your digital
X-ray image from others who might wish to see it is virtually
impossible. Every doctor who looks at the image could make a
copy—for free, instantly, and with perfect fidelity—and send it
to someone else. And the same goes for others who might have
access to the image, such as your insurance company.
Critics will make claims about how we can use encryp-
tion to prevent the unauthorized use of your image, but those
claims come with important caveats, and they are dangerous if
pursued to their ultimate conclusion. In summary, the upside
of a digital X-ray image is how easy it makes it to get help; the
downside is how hard it is to protect digital information.
But the analysis doesn’t end there. The benefits of your digital
X-ray image go beyond just you. Imagine a huge collection
of digital X-ray images, all labeled with diagnoses. We might
use computers to search through them and get machines to
learn what to look for. And these systems, because of the magic
of zero marginal cost, can eventually provide future diagno-
ses for free. This is exactly what we want to happen, but how
rapidly we get there and who controls the results will depend
on who has access to digital X-ray images.
If we made all healthcare information public, we would
dramatically accelerate innovation in diagnosing and treat-
ing diseases. At present, only well-funded pharma companies
INFORMATIONAL FREEDOM 149
and a few university research projects are able to develop new
medical insights and drugs, since only they have the money
required to get sufficient numbers of patients to participate in
research. Many scientists therefore wind up joining big pharma
companies, and so the results of their work wind up protected
by patents. Even at universities, the research agenda tends to
be tightly controlled, and access to information is seen as a
competitive advantage. While I understand that we have a lot
of work to do to create a world in which the sharing of health
information is widely accepted and has limited downsides, this
is what we should be aiming for.
You might wonder why I keep asserting that assuring pri-
vacy is impossible. After all, don’t we have encryption? Well,
there are several problems that encryption can’t solve. The first
is that the cryptographic keys used for encryption and decryp-
tion are just digital information themselves, so keeping them
secure is another instance of the original problem. Even gener-
ating a key on your own machine offers limited protection, un-
less you are willing to risk that the data you’re protecting will
be lost forever if you lose the key. As a result, most systems in-
clude some kind of cloud-based backup, making it possible that
someone will access your data, either through technical inter-
ception or by tricking a human being to unwittingly partici-
pate in a security breach. If you want a sense of how hard this
problem is, consider the millions of dollars in cryptocurrency
that can no longer be accessed by people who lost their key or
who had them taken over through some form of attack. The
few cryptocurrency exchanges that have a decent track record
have had to invest massively in security procedures, personnel
screening, and operational secrecy.
The second problem is known as “endpoint security.” The
doctor you’re sending your X-ray to for a second opinion might
have a program on their computer that can access anything
150 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
shown on the screen. In order to view your X-ray, the doctor
has to decrypt and display it, so this program will have access
to the image. Avoiding such a scenario would require us to lock
down all computing devices, but that would mean preventing
end users from installing software on them. Furthermore, even
a locked-down endpoint is still subject to the “analog hole:”
Someone could simply take a picture of the screen, which
itself could then be shared. Locked-down computing devices
reduce informational freedom and constrict innovation, but
they also pose a huge threat to the knowledge loop and democ-
racy. Handing over control of what you can compute and who
you can exchange information with would essentially amount
to submitting to a dictatorial system. Mobile computation is
already heading in this direction, partly on the pretext of a
need to protect privacy. Apple uses this as an argument to ex-
plain why the only way to install apps on an iPhone is through
the App Store, which they control. Imagine this type of regime
extended to all computing devices, including your laptop and
cloud-based servers, and you have one way in which privacy is
incompatible with technological progress. We can either have
strong privacy assurance or open general-purpose computing,
but we can’t have both.
Many people contend that there must be some way to pre-
serve privacy and keep innovating, but I challenge anyone to
present a coherent vision of the future where individuals con-
trol technology and privacy is meaningfully protected. When-
ever you leave your house, you might be filmed, since every
smartphone has a camera, and in the future we’ll see tiny
cameras on tiny drones. Your gait identifies you almost as
uniquely as your fingerprint, your face is probably somewhere
on the internet, and your car’s license plate is readable by any
camera. You leave your DNA almost everywhere you go, and
we will soon be able to sequence DNA at home for around $100.
INFORMATIONAL FREEDOM 151
Should the government control all of these technologies? And
if so, should penalties be enforced for using them to analyze
someone else’s presence or movement? Many are tempted to
reply yes to these questions, without thinking through the con-
sequences of such legislation for innovation and for the relative
power of the state versus citizens. For example, citizens
recently used facial recognition technology to identify police
officers who had removed IDs from their uniforms. Advocates
of banning this technology are overly focused on surveillance
and never seem to consider these kind of “sousveillance” use
cases (from French sous which means below).
There is an even more profound reason why privacy is
incompatible with technological progress. Entropy is a funda-
mental property of the universe, which means it is easier to
destroy than to create. It can take hours to build a sand cas-
tle that is destroyed by a single wave washing ashore. It takes
two decades of care for a human to grow up and a single bullet
to end their life. Because of this inherent asymmetry, techno-
logical progress increases our ability to destroy more quickly
than our ability to create. Today, it still takes twenty years for
a human to grow, and yet modern weapons can kill thousands
and even millions of people in an instant. So as we make tech-
nological progress, we must eventually insist on less privacy in
order to protect society. Imagine a future in which anyone can
create a biological weapon in their basement laboratory—for
example, an even more deadly version of the virus that causes
COVID-19. After-the-crime law enforcement becomes mean-
ingless in such a world.
If we can’t protect privacy without passing control of techno­
logy into the hands of a few, we should embrace a post-privacy
world. We should work to protect people and their
freedom, rather than data and privacy. We should allow more
information to become public while strengthening individual
152 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
freedom. Much information is already disclosed through hacks
and data breaches, and many people voluntarily share private
information on blogs and social media (McCandless, 2020).
The economic freedom generated by the introduction of UBI
will play a key role here, because much of the fear of the dis-
closure of private information results from potential economic
consequences. For instance, if you are worried that you might
lose your job if your employer finds out that you wrote a blog
post about your struggles with depression, you are much less
likely to share, a situation that, repeated across many people,
helps keep the topic of depression a taboo. There are, of course,
countries where the consequences of the leaking of private
information such as sexual orientation or political organizing
can be deadly. To be able to achieve the kind of post-privacy
world I envision here, democracy with humanist values is an
essential precondition.
If a post-privacy world seems impossible or terrifying, it is
worth remembering that privacy is a modern, urban construct.
Although the US Constitution protects certain specific rights,
it does not recognize a generalized right to privacy. For thou-
sands of years prior to the eighteenth century, most people
had no concept directly corresponding to our modern notion
of privacy. Many of the functions of everyday life used to take
place much more openly than they do today. And privacy still
varies greatly among cultures: For example, many Westerners
are shocked when they first experience the openness of traditional
Chinese public restrooms (Sasha, 2013). All over the
world, people in small villages live with less privacy than is
common in big cities. You can either regard the lack of privacy
in villages as oppressive, or you can see a close-knit commu-
nity as a real benefit, for instance when your neighbor notices
that you are sick because you haven’t left the house and offers
to go shopping for you.
INFORMATIONAL FREEDOM 153
“But what about my bank account?” you might ask. “If my
account number was public, wouldn’t it be easier for criminals
to take my money?” This is why we need to construct systems
such as Apple Pay and Android Pay that require additional
authentication to authorize payments. Two-factor authentica-
tion systems will become much more common in the future,
and we will increasingly rely on systems such as Sift, which
assesses in real time the likelihood that a transaction is fraud-
ulent. Finally, as the Bitcoin blockchain shows, it is possible
to have a public ledger that anyone can inspect, as long as the
transactions on it are protected by “private keys” which allow
only the owner of a Bitcoin address to initiate transactions.
Another area where people are nervous about privacy is
health information. We worry, for instance, that employers or
insurers will discriminate against us if they learn that we have a
certain disease or condition. Here the economic freedom con-
ferred by UBI would help protect us from destitution because
of discrimination. Furthermore by tightening the labor market,
UBI would also make it harder for employers to refuse to hire
certain groups of people in the first place. We could also enact
laws that require transparency from employers to more easily
detect discrimination (note that transparency is often difficult
to require today because it conflicts with privacy).
Observers such as Christopher Poole, the founder of the
online message board 4Chan, have worried that in the absence
of privacy, individuals wouldn’t be able to engage online as
freely. Privacy, they think, helps people feel comfortable as-
suming multiple online identities that may depart dramatically
from their “real life” selves. I think, in contrast, that by keeping
our online selves separate, we pay a price in the form of anxiety,
neurosis, and other psychological ailments. It is healthier to
be transparent than to hide behind veils of privacy. Emotional
health derives from the integration of our different interests
154 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
into an authentic multi-dimensional personality, rather than
a fragmentation of the self. This view is supported by studies
of how online self-presentation impacts mental health, where
inauthentic presentations were associated with higher levels of
anxiety and neurosis (Twomey & O’Reilly, 2017).
Many who argue against a post-privacy approach point
out that oppressive governments can use information against
their citizens. Without a doubt, preserving democracy and
the rule of law is essential if we want to achieve a high degree
of informational freedom, and this is addressed explicitly in
Part Five. Conversely, however, more public information
makes dictatorial takeovers considerably harder. For instance,
it is much clearer who is benefiting from political change if tax
records are in the public domain.
18. Psychological Freedom
Imagine you live in a society that has achieved economic and
informational freedom. Would you make good use of those
freedoms, or would your beliefs and fears hold you back from
engaging in the knowledge loop? Or worse yet, would your
attention be taken up by systems designed to capture it for
someone else’s benefit? Would you feel free to pursue your
own interests, or would your Industrial Age beliefs keep you
trapped in the job loop?
Would you have a strong sense of purpose, or would you feel
adrift without a clear career path and a boss telling you what
to do? Would you seek out new knowledge, or would you seek
to confirm what you already believe? Would you feel free to
PSYCHOLOGICAL FREEDOM 155
create, or would you hold yourself back out of fear? And would
you recognize when your attention is being manipulated?
While the previous sections on economic and informational
freedom examined changes that require collective action, this
section addresses individual action. We must free ourselves
from our deeply engrained Industrial Age beliefs, and we can
start on that path by developing some form of mindfulness
practice. This, in my view, is essential to freely directing our
attention in the Knowledge Age.
I should start by acknowledging the profound psychological
dimension of the transition out of the Industrial Age. Social
and economic disruption were making life stressful even before
the COVID-19 pandemic. The unfolding climate crisis and the
ongoing escalation of political and social tensions around the
world are further causes for anxiety. To make matters worse,
we have yet to learn to live healthily with new technology,
and we obsessively check our smartphones during meet-
ings, while driving, and before we go to sleep. This is taking
an immense psychological toll, as indicated by higher rates of
sleep disorders, suicide, drug overdoses, and antisocial behav-
ior such as bullying.
We need to go beyond that general insight about the popu-
lation at large and look at what goes on in our own heads; this,
however, requires time and effort because our brains are easily
hijacked by emotional reactions that interfere with introspec-
tion and self-awareness. Can we overcome the anxieties that
might prevent us from gaining, creating, and sharing knowl-
edge? Can we put down our phones, when they are designed to
draw us in? It might seem like a monumental task, but human-
kind is uniquely adaptable. After all, we have navigated two
prior transitions that required dramatic psychological change,
first from the Forager Age to the Agrarian Age, and then to the
Industrial Age.
156 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
We now understand why humans can adapt so well. As neuroscientists
have discovered, our brains remain plastic even as we
age, meaning that what and how we think can be changed. In
fact, we can change it quite deliberately, with techniques such as
conscious breathing, meditation, and cognitive behavioral ther-
apy (McClintock, 2020; “Cognitive Behavioral Therapy,” 2020).
As a crude approximation, the brain can be thought of as con-
sisting of two systems: one that instinctually produces emotions
and snap judgments and one that allows for rational thought
but requires effort (Kahneman, 2013). Mindfulness techniques
allow us better access to our rational faculties by limiting the
extent to which our instinctual reactions control our behavior.
The idiom “take a deep breath” captures this idea well:
Pause and reflect before acting. The larger concept of delib-
erately freeing the mind is found in both Eastern and Western
traditions. The Stoic philosophers developed practices of
thought to temper the emotions, such as imagining the loss of
a possession repeatedly before it occurs. In Buddhism, medita-
tion techniques help practitioners achieve similar psychologi-
cal freedom. We now have neuroscience research that lets us
begin to understand how these techniques work, showing that
their persistence over time is not a matter of religious belief or
superstition, but grounded in the physical reality of our brains
(Yoon et al., 2019).
We will now examine what we need to free ourselves from
so we can direct our attention to contributing to the knowl-
edge loop and other Knowledge Age activities.
FREEDOM FROM WANTING
The extraordinary success of capitalism has made us confused
about work and consumption. Instead of seeing them as a
PSYCHOLOGICAL FREEDOM 157
means to an end, we now see them as sources of purpose in
themselves. Working harder and consuming more allows the
economy to grow, so we can … work harder and consume more.
Though this sounds crazy, it has become the default position.
We went so far as to ingrain this view in religion, moving to
a Protestant work ethic that encourages working harder and
earning more (Skidelsky & Skidelsky, 2013). Similar changes
have taken place throughout Asia, where other religions have
undergone this transition, most prominently in the case of
the “New Confucianism” as championed by Lee Kuan Yew, the
founding Prime Minister of Singapore (Pezzutto, 2019).
Even worse, we frequently find ourselves trapped in what’s
known as “positional consumption,” or “Keeping up with the
Joneses.” This is where what matters to us are not the inher-
ent benefits of the things we buy, but their relative prestige.
If our neighbor buys a new car, we find ourselves wanting an
even newer and more expensive model. Such behavior has
emerged not just with respect to goods but also to services—
think of the $1,000 haircut or the $595-per-person dinner at
a Michelin-starred restaurant (Orlo Salon, n.d.; Cross, 2020).
Of course, much of this confusion has been fueled by trillions
of dollars of advertising spend aimed at convincing us to buy
more, flooding us with imagery of how happy we’ll be if only
we do. Between economic policy, advertising, and religion, it is
no wonder that many people are convinced that materialism is
part of human nature.
However, our addiction to consumption is exactly that—
an addiction that exploits a mechanism in the brain. When
you desire something, a new car for instance, your brain gets
a dopamine hit based on your anticipated happiness, which
makes you feel good. Once you get the car, you compare it to
your prior expectations. If the car turns out to be less than
you expected, your dopamine levels will decrease and this can
158 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
cause extreme disappointment. If your expectations are met,
your dopamine levels will stay constant. Only if your expec-
tations are exceeded will you get another hit of dopamine.
Now as you get used to having the new car, your expectation
adjusts so quite quickly after the initial purchase you no lon-
ger receive any new dopamine from having a new car. The un-
fortunate result of all this is known as the “hedonic treadmill.”
When your brain grows accustomed to something like a car or
an apartment, then recreating the same feeling of happiness
as your original anticipation for the car or apartment now
requires a faster car or a bigger apartment (Szalavitz, 2017).
That same mechanism, however, can provide long-term
motivation when the anticipation is aimed at creation or
exploration instead of consumption. As an artist or scientist,
you can forever seek out new subjects. As a traveler, you can
forever seek out new destinations.
Freedom from wanting—in the sense of the delusional belief
that consumption as such will bring happiness or meaning—is
possible if we recognize that we can point our brain away from
consumption and toward other pursuits, many of which are
part of the knowledge loop. Redirecting our reward mechanism
re-establishes the difference between needs and wants. You
need to eat, while you may want to eat at a Michelin-starred
restaurant. You need to drink water, while you may want to
drink an expensive wine. This is why UBI, as discussed earlier,
focuses on meeting needs rather than wants. Once you are eco-
nomically free to meet your needs and are freeing yourself from
wanting, you can direct your attention to the knowledge loop.
Suppose skiing is your passion and you want to keep seek-
ing the perfect powder. How would UBI let you focus your
attention on it? On UBI alone, you might not be able to afford
an annual ski trip to the Swiss Alps, but ski equipment is actu-
ally not expensive when you consider that it can last for many
PSYCHOLOGICAL FREEDOM 159
years and can be shared with others. And if you’re willing to
hike up a mountain, you can ski as much as you want without
buying a lift pass at an expensive resort.
In this instance, psychological freedom means freeing
yourself of assumptions that you might have about how to
go skiing. It helps, of course, to remind yourself that many of
these assumptions are formed by companies that have a com-
mercial interest in portraying skiing that way. If you can learn
to reframe it as an outdoor adventure and a chance to be in
nature, it needn’t be expensive. A similar logic holds for any
number of other activities.
To free ourselves from wanting, we should remind our-
selves of the difference between needs and wants, learn how
our brain works, and point our seeking away from consump-
tion toward creative and experiential activities. For many of us,
that means letting go of existing attachments to wants that we
have developed over a long time. Finally, we should always cast
a critical eye on the advertising we encounter, understanding
that it perpetuates illusions about needs and wants and keeps
us trapped in the job loop.
FREEDOM TO LEARN
Young children ask dozens of questions a day, often annoying
their parents who don’t have the time to answer. Humans are
naturally curious, and it is this curiosity that has driven much
of our progress (Shin & Kim, 2019). At the same time, our
curiosity was not well-suited to the Industrial Age. If you em-
ploy people in a factory job that has them performing the same
action all day every day, curiosity is not a desirable trait. The
same goes for many modern service jobs, such as operating a
cash register or delivering packages.
160 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
The present-day educational system was built to support
the job loop of the industrial economy, so it is not surprising
that it tends to suppress rather than encourage curiosity (Gatto
et al., 2017). While educators hardly ever identify “suppressing
curiosity” as one of their goals, many of our educational prac-
tices do exactly that. For instance, forcing every eight-year-old
to learn the same things in math, teaching for tests, and cutting
music and art classes all discourage curiosity.
A critical way that we undermine curiosity is by evaluating
areas of knowledge according to whether we think they will
help us get a “good job.” If your child expressed an interest in
learning Swahili or wanting to play the mandolin, would you
support that? Or would you say something like, “But how will
you earn a living with that?” The latest iteration of this think-
ing is an enthusiasm for learning how to code in order to get
high-paying job in tech.
Here again, instead of encouraging curiosity about coding,
either for its own sake or as a tool in science or art, we force it
into the Industrial Age logic of the job loop.
We need to free ourselves from this instrumental view of
knowledge and embrace learning for its own sake. As we’ve
already seen, UBI can go a long way in allaying fears that we
won’t be able to support ourselves if we let our curiosity guide
our learning. But will we have enough engineers and scientists
in such a world? If anything, we’ll likely have more than we do
under the current system. After all, forcing kids to study some-
thing is a surefire way to squelch their natural curiosity.
The knowledge loop, accelerated by digital technology,
brings to the fore other limits to learning that we must also
overcome. The first of these is confirmation bias. As humans,
we find it easier to process information that confirms what
we already believe to be true. We can access a huge amount
of online content that confirms our pre-existing beliefs rather
PSYCHOLOGICAL FREEDOM 161
than learning something new. We risk becoming increasingly
entrenched in these views, fracturing into groups with strong
and self-reinforcing beliefs. This phenomenon becomes even
more pronounced with the automatic personalization of many
internet systems, with “filter bubbles” screening out conflict-
ing information (Pariser, 2021).
Another barrier to learning is the human tendency to jump
to conclusions on the basis of limited data. After a study sug-
gested that smaller schools tended to produce better student
performance than larger schools, educators began to create
a lot of smaller schools, only for a subsequent study to find
that a lot of smaller schools were also doing poorly. It turns
out that the more students a school has, the more likely it is
to approximate the overall distribution of students. A small
school is therefore more likely to have students who perform
predominantly well or poorly.
Daniel Kahneman discusses such biases in his book Thinking,
Fast and Slow. We rely on heuristics that result in confirma-
tion bias and storytelling because many of the systems in the
human brain are optimized for speed and effortlessness. These
heuristics aren’t necessarily all bad as they can contribute to
important ruin-avoidance mechanisms (something which
Kahneman ignores), but they served us better in a world with
an analog knowledge loop, where more time existed for correct-
ing mistakes. In today’s high-velocity digital knowledge loop,
we must slow ourselves down or risk passing along incorrect
stories. A recent study showed that false stories spread online
many times more quickly than true ones (Vosoughi et al., 2018).
The bulk of online experiences we currently interact with
are designed to exploit our cognitive and emotional biases, not
to help us overcome them. Companies such as Facebook and
Twitter become more valuable as they capture more of our
attention by appealing to what Kahneman calls System 1: the
162 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
parts of our brain that run automatically and that are respon-
sible for our cognitive biases (Kahneman, 2013). You are more
likely to look at cute animal pictures or status updates from
your friends than to read an in-depth analysis of a proposal for
a carbon tax. The recent explosion of “fake news” exploits this
flaw in our systems, making large-scale manipulation possible.
New systems can help here. We might, for instance, imagine
an online reader that presents opposing viewpoints to a given
story. For each topic, you could explore both similar and op-
posing views. Such a reader could be presented as a browser
plug-in, so that when you’ve ventured beyond the confines of a
social media platform and are looking around on the Web, you
could be drawn into actively exploring beyond the bounds of
your usual sources (Wenger, 2011).
Fundamentally though, we all have to actively work on
engaging what Kahneman calls System 2: the part of our brain
that requires effort, but that lets us think independently and
rationally. Developing and keeping up some kind of mindful-
ness practice is a key enabler for overcoming biases and freeing
ourselves to learn.
FREEDOM TO CREATE
After learning, the next step in the knowledge loop is creating.
Here again, we need to work on our freedom. As Picasso once
said, “Every child is an artist. The problem is how to remain
an artist […]” As adults, we censor ourselves, inhibiting the
natural creativity we enjoyed as children. The educational
system, with its focus on preparing for standardized tests,
further crushes our creative impulses. Many people eventu-
ally come to believe that creativity is something that they’re
not capable of.
PSYCHOLOGICAL FREEDOM 163
The job loop further solidifies these beliefs about creativ-
ity, and even institutionalizes them. Society categorizes people
into amateurs and professionals. We venerate the professional
guitar player, artist or sculptor but denigrate the amateur, dis-
missing their work as “amateurish.” When we start to measure
creativity by how much money an artist or musician makes
rather than the passion they feel for a pursuit, there is no won-
der that many people fear they will never measure up.
Distractions also inhibit our impulses to create. There’s
always another YouTube video to watch, another email to read,
another post to glance at. Our brains are poorly suited to en-
vironments that are overloaded with information specifically
curated to capture our attention. We evolved in a world where
potentially relevant information—for instance, the sound of an
approaching animal—could be a matter of life or death, and our
brains are thus easily distracted. This is an example of a maladaptation
to the current environment akin to our evolutionary
craving for sugar in a world with added sugar everywhere.
In order to be able to create, we need to disconnect our-
selves from many of those strategically selected and concen-
trated stimuli. Again, a mindfulness practice will be helpful
here, allowing us to tune out interruptions, and there are many
hacks we can use to prevent them in the first place, such as
putting our phone into Do Not Disturb (DND) mode (I keep
my phone on DND at all times with only family members being
able to get through—that way I use my phone when I want to
and not when Facebook or Twitter want me to).
FREEDOM TO SHARE
Even after we have created something, many of us fear that
when we share it, it will be criticized. Someone will call our
164 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
painting ugly, our code incompetent, or our proposal naive.
Given the state of much online commentary and the preva-
lence of “trolling,” those fears are well-founded—but they
need not inhibit our participation in the knowledge loop. Part
of the answer is to work on the inner strength to continue
sharing despite criticism.
Another part of the answer is that we should cultivate em-
pathy. Whenever we comment on the work of others online,
we should keep in mind that they dared to create and share it.
And we should also remember that by contributing to the
knowledge loop, they have engaged in the very thing that
makes us human. Those who manage online communities
should provide tools for flagging and banning people who are
abusive or make threats aimed at shutting down sharing.
If you live in a country that is subject to dictatorship, cen-
sorship, or mob rule, then sharing opinions, art, or research
can result in imprisonment, torture, or even death. And yet
despite that, we routinely find people who freely share in
these places. We should take inspiration and courage from
those people, and we should support people’s ability to build
systems to enable sharing in these places that are censorship-
resistant and that allow for pseudonymous and anonymous
expression (even though these systems ultimately can pro-
vide only limited protection, as discussed in the earlier section
on privacy).
In the Knowledge Age, there is such a thing as sharing too
much—not sharing too much personal information, but mind-
lessly sharing harmful information. Threats, rumors, and lies
can take on lives of their own, and we can find ourselves con-
tributing to an information cascade, in which an initial bit of
information picks up speed and becomes an avalanche that
destroys everything in its path. So, as with freedom in other
contexts, there’s a double-edged aspect to having the psycho-
PSYCHOLOGICAL FREEDOM 165
logical freedom to share. We need to free ourselves from fear
to share our creations and our ideas, while also needing to
control our emotional responses so that we do not poison the
knowledge loop. Ask yourself whether what you’re sharing will
enhance or hurt the pursuit of knowledge. If the answer is not
obvious, it might be better not to share.
PSYCHOLOGICAL FREEDOM AND HUMANISM
Self-regulation lies at the heart of psychological freedom and
allows us to separate our wants from our needs. It lets us con-
sider our initial reactions to what others are saying, writing, or
doing without immediately reacting in anger. It lets us have
empathy for others and remain open to learning something
new. And it lets us overcome our fears of creating and sharing.
Still, we humans have a need for meaning that has us search-
ing for purpose and recognition in ways that can all too easily
result in us being psychologically unfree. Existential angst can
express itself in many different forms, ranging from an inabil-
ity to do anything to a manic desire to do everything. The per-
sistence of religion is partly explained by its ability to address
the need for meaning. Most religions claim that our purpose is
to follow a set of divinely ordained rules, and that if we follow
them, the respective god or gods will recognize and potentially
even reward our existence.
Many organized religions intentionally disrupt the knowl-
edge loop. They restrict the process of critical inquiry by which
knowledge improves over time, through mechanisms such as
censorship and “divine knowledge,” which is often encoded
in sacred texts. This serves to maintain the power of the gate-
keepers to the texts and their interpretation. While adhering
to a religion may meet your existential psychological need for
166 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
meaning, it may also make it difficult for you to participate
fully and freely in the knowledge loop.
The same is true for many informal beliefs. Belief in a pre-
ordained individual destiny can be used to fulfill the need for
meaning, but it also acts as an obstacle to psychological free-
dom via thoughts such as “this was meant to be, there’s nothing
I can do about it.” Or people can belong to communities that
meet the need for meaning through recognition, but impose a
strict conformity that restricts participation in the knowledge
loop. It can often be difficult to recognize how much of one’s
behavior is controlled by custom or peer pressure.
A new humanism, built around recognizing the importance
of knowledge, can provide an alternative that enhances psy-
chological freedom instead of inhibiting it. With participation
in the knowledge loop as a key source of purpose, learning
new things, being creative and sharing with others is encour-
aged. This doesn’t mean that everyone has to be the proverbial
rocket scientist. There are a great many ways to participate in
the knowledge loop, including creating art, as well as caring for
others and the environment.
To help people be psychologically free, we need to substan-
tially change most countries’ education systems. Today’s sys-
tems were developed to support the Industrial Age, and their
goal is to shape people to participate in the job loop. We need a
system that celebrates knowledge for its own sake, allows stu-
dents to discover their individual interests and deepen those
into a purpose, and teaches people about how to be psycho-
logically free. In other words, we need to put humanism at the
center of learning.
Humanism and the knowledge loop thus have import-
ant implications for how we can reorganize society and take
responsibility for the world around us. This is the subject of
Part Five.
PSYCHOLOGICAL FREEDOM 167
PART V:
TAKING ACTION
Even if you’re now convinced of the
importance of the knowledge loop and
attention scarcity in the digital age, and
persuaded by my suggestions for increas-
ing economic, informational, and psycho-
logical freedom, that still leaves a huge
question: Can it be done?
You may think my proposals to change
everything from how money is created to
who controls computation are too extreme.
You may dismiss them as utopian and argue
that we cannot change everything about
how we live. And yet to do so ignores the
fact that we have already changed every-
thing twice. Each of our two prior shifts in
scarcity—from food in the Forager Age to
land in the Agrarian Age, and from land to
capital in the Industrial Age—was accom-
panied by extraordinary transformations.
When we transitioned from the Forager
Age to the Agrarian Age, we went from
168 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
nomadic to sedentary, from egalitar-
ian to hierarchical, from promiscuous
to monogamous, and from animistic to
theistic religions. When we went from
the Agrarian Age to the Industrial Age,
we moved from the countryside to cities,
from large extended families to nuclear
ones, from commons to private property,
and from great-chain-of-being theologies
to the Protestant work ethic. Though the
first of these transitions took place over
millennia and the second one over centuries,
they still show that a shift in the
binding scarcity comes with profound
changes in how we live.
With scarcity shifting once more, from
capital to attention, we will again have to
change everything—no matter how daunt-
ing that may seem. What follows is a series
of ideas for how each of us can contribute
to that change. Many different projects
must be tackled—my list is far from ex-
haustive, and should be regarded as inspi-
ration for how we can take responsibility.
GROWING MINDFULNESS 169
19. Growing Mindfulness
One action we should all take is the development of a mindful-
ness practice. The word “mindfulness” is used a lot and is easy
to dismiss, but for the reasons discussed in the section on psy-
chological freedom, without such a practice it will be difficult
to participate fully in the other actions discussed below. We
each need to find out what works for us, whether it’s medita-
tion, yoga, running, or something else entirely. I do a conscious
breathing exercise every day, first thing in the morning and last
thing in the evening. I started doing this about five years ago
and it has changed my life profoundly.
It is also important that we help and inspire other people to
do the same. There have been discussions on whether or not
math should be mandatory in school, but there has been no
such debate around mindfulness. It is entirely possible to go
through school and college or university without developing a
practice of one’s own. Every one of us would be better off with
more mindfulness—the same cannot be said about algebra.
Another way to contribute to the spread of mindfulness is
through research and entrepreneurship. Much remains to be
understood about how different techniques, or drugs such as
psilocybin, influence our brains. There is plenty of room for
services such as individualized coaching, and for more apps
that help with meditation and conscious breathing.
170 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
20. Fighting the Climate Crisis
The climate crisis is the single biggest collective problem fac-
ing humanity. If we fail to direct attention and resources to
fighting it, the climate crisis will make the transition from the
Industrial Age worse than the transition into it, which involved
two world wars. This may sound hyperbolic, but the climate
crisis represents an existential risk for humanity.
Every day, unimaginable amounts of energy hit the Earth in
the form of sunlight. Much of this energy is radiated back into
space, but greenhouse gases reduce the Earth’s ability to shed
heat and instead keep it trapped inside the atmosphere. To get
a sense of how much heat we are talking about, we can express
it in terms of Hiroshima-sized nuclear bombs.
Compared to pre-industrial times, how much more heat
would you guess the Earth is retaining? The equivalent of
one nuclear bomb per year? Per month? Per week? Per day?
The reality is that the extra heat being trapped amounts to four
nuclear bombs per second, of every minute, of every hour, of
every day, three hundred and sixty-five days a year.
Imagine for a moment that alien spaceships were dropping
four nuclear bombs into our atmosphere every second. What
would we do? We would drop everything else to fight them.
This is, of course, roughly the plot of the movie Independence
Day. Except with the climate crisis, it’s not aliens, it’s our-
selves; and it’s not bright explosions, it’s all the molecules in
the atmosphere and in the oceans wiggling a bit harder (that’s
what it means for something to heat up).
There are many ways to fight the climate crisis. They
include making personal changes such as switching to elec-
tric heating, voting for politicians who are committed to tack-
DEFENDING DEMOCRACY 171
ling the problem, and becoming active in movements such as
Extinction Rebellion. As with mindfulness, research and entre-
preneurship provide crucial avenues for action. For instance,
there are many questions in how to make nuclear fusion work
(which would provide a clean source of abundant electricity)
or how to most effectively draw down greenhouse gases from
the atmosphere. There are companies to be founded that will
further the adoption of solar power, not just here in the US
but in the developing world.
21. Defending Democracy
What is the political process by which we should achieve the
profound changes that are required? We are seeing some lead-
ers emerge in this period of transition who provide simplistic,
populist answers to difficult questions, advocating a return to
the past. There is a danger around the world, including here in
the United States, that we will slide into dictatorship and other
forms of autocratic government.
Democracy is the only system of government in which the
knowledge loop can function to its full potential. Democracy
allows new policies to be tested, with a peaceful transition
to another set of policies if they don’t work. As tempting as a
quick autocratic fix might seem, we need to figure out what it
takes to have a working democracy. Some things seem obvious,
such as limiting the influence of money in politics.
Because attention is scarce, it can be bought, either by rais-
ing and spending a lot of money, or by doing or saying out-
rageous things. Neither is good for democracy: The former
172 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
because it makes candidates beholden to the interests of their
backers, and the latter because it results in polarization rather
than critical debate.
Going forward, we should experiment with new forms of
democracy. Given the complexity of the modern world, I am in
favor of specialization and delegated voting. We should explore
forms of democracy in which I can delegate my vote to people I
trust on specific issues, such as energy policy. These delegates,
in turn, would elect a leader for the energy agency based on
their proposed policies.
A more extreme version of this, which is worth exploring
in the context of the climate crisis, is a so-called “citizens
assembly.” Citizens would be selected at random from the
population to form an assembly and given access to experts
in the field. With the experts’ help, they would come up with
a plan that is then either implemented right away or put to a
vote. This idea recalls Athenian democracy, which relied on the
random selection of citizens for various government functions.
The advantage of such an approach is that it would shortcut
long electoral cycles and allow for policies to be chosen that
might not be popular with any one party. For example, Ireland
recently successfully used a citizens’ assembly to develop an
abortion policy.
These are just two of many possible variations of how democ-
racy can work. With digital technologies, we have options
that were not previously feasible. Take, for example, the town
of Jun in Spain, which uses Twitter as the primary communication
channel between citizens and local government offi-
cials (Powers & Roy, 2018). We should start to explore more
of these possibilities, and part of that means revisiting the
geographic units we use for decision-making. The key princi-
ple here is that decisions should be made at the lowest pos-
sible level. We need to make some decisions globally, such as
FOSTERING DECENTRALIZATION 173
limiting greenhouse gases, but how we achieve that should be
decided at lower levels.
Making decisions at the lowest possible level, a principle
known as “subsidiarity,” is especially important during a time
of great change. For instance, what is possible in education is
changing rapidly due to digital technology, so we should allow
experimentation at a local level. By running many small exper-
iments, we can more rapidly figure what works well.
Most of all, we need to reject attempts at dictatorship
and autocracy. These effectively disable the knowledge loop
because they cannot tolerate freedom of expression—their
power is based on suppressing criticism. This is especially dan-
gerous in a time of transition that requires debating and imple-
menting new ideas. There are many ways of defending democ-
racy, starting with the obvious one of voting against would-be
dictators. Of course, speaking out against them once they are
in power is also crucial, even if it comes at high personal cost.
Finally, building and participating in systems that support
uncensorable, anonymous or pseudonymous expression is a
crucial action to help undermine dictatorships.
22. Fostering Decentralization
As I have previously described, most developed countries have
large central governments with a high degree of centralized
decision-making. That is complemented by a high degree of
concentration in the economy, with a few firms dominating
most industries. Both of these things are bad for the knowledge
loop, as they inhibit experimentation. A recent example of this
174 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
was illustrated by the response to COVID-19. In the US, testing
was largely federally controlled, making it difficult to execute
a differentiated state-level response. Even a state the size of
California, which on a standalone basis would be the world’s
sixth largest economy, was unable to approve rapid tests devel-
oped by California-based startups (Haverstock, 2020).
We can take many actions to help foster a return to de-
centralization. For example, where it is permitted, parents
can choose to homeschool their children with other parents,
forming experimental education pods. More importantly, we
can participate in the burgeoning field of blockchain technologies.
The best known blockchain is Bitcoin, a digital alternative
to gold.
Blockchains are decentralized networks that can nonethe-
less achieve consensus, such as on how many Bitcoin are con-
trolled by which address on the network. This matters because,
as we saw earlier, much of the power of companies such as
Facebook, Google, and Amazon comes from network effects.
Government power is also derived from a network effect that
arises from the ability to issue currency and regulate banking.
Building decentralized alternatives to these systems using
blockchain technology is a way of removing power from gov-
ernment and large corporations.
As it turns out, when blockchains work properly, they are
uncensorable. Unless a government or corporation can take
over a large percentage of the nodes on a blockchain network,
the information maintained by the network will continue to
be propagated correctly, even when some nodes are trying to
purge or manipulate the contents. The only option govern-
ments face is to cut their population off from accessing the
networks, and this requires a high degree of control over all
internet traffic (as has been achieved, for example, by China).
This is why fighting against national firewalls is so important.
IMPROVING LEARNING 175
While any one new blockchain system has a high likelihood
of failing, the large number of current experiments will pro-
duce systems that have the potential to be transformative on
a global scale. One of the most exciting possibilities is that
we may end up with UBI built outside of existing government
budgets as part of a cryptocurrency. A variety of projects are cur-
rently attempting this, including Circles and the $UBI token.
To be clear, decentralization and blockchains do not rep-
resent a panacea. Some problems require centralization to be
solved (for instance, water and sewage are centrally controlled
for a reason). And decentralization can bring its own prob-
lems, such as the potential aggravation of the “Cyber-Balkans”
problem that we encountered earlier. But at a time of excessive
centralization, it is crucial that we foster decentralization to
act as a counterweight.
23. Improving Learning
Learning is the hardest step in the knowledge loop. How
many of us say something like “I wish I could play the guitar,”
but either never do anything about it or give up after a short
period? Learning is hard, and we should try to make it easier,
more fun, and more social.
There has been plenty of recent progress here: for exam-
ple, Duolingo has made language learning more accessible
by breaking it down into small units that are customized to
each learner.
I am personally excited about helping to create two par-
ticular projects. One is an integrated platform for learning
176 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
math, programming, engineering, and science. These areas
of knowledge are closely related, yet the way we teach them
is often oddly disconnected. The other project is a com-
pendium of the principles of knowledge. We have so much knowledge
that it seems impossible to know more than a tiny
fraction of it all, but this is partly an illusion because much
of it is a variation or an application of a much smaller set of
underlying principles. Collecting and explaining these will
make knowledge more accessible and help unify areas that
seem unrelated.
While the COVID-19 crisis has come at a terrible cost, it
has also accelerated innovation in learning. Many parents are
discovering that homeschooling their children, whether indi-
vidually or in small groups, may be a viable option. There are
many ways to encourage learning that is based on fostering our
innate curiosity, from simply learning something new oneself
to inventing and building new systems.
24. Promoting and Living Humanism
Given the limits of capitalism that we explored earlier, we
might find socialism or even some form of Marxism tempting.
That too, however, represents a return to a populist past rather
than an invention of the future. The alternatives that people
commonly propose are also Industrial Age thinking, rooted in
the scarcity of capital. As should be clear by now, my proposals
are effectively about shrinking capitalism, much as we previ-
ously shrunk agriculture, to make room for participation in the
knowledge loop.
PROMOTING AND LIVING HUMANISM 177
Central to this project is the promotion of humanism and
the policies associated with it, such as the adoption of UBI.
Everyone can take action on this, from contributing to UBI tri-
als to creating content under a Creative Commons license.
We can also promote humanism by applying humanist
values to our everyday decision-making. The starting point for
this is to see ourselves as human first, with nationality, faith,
gender, and race all a distant second. I realize that this is eas-
ier for me as a white male living in the United States, but that
removes nothing from the underlying values of humanism.
I described some of these in the earlier chapter on humanism,
but here is a more complete list.
Solidarity: There are nearly eight billion people living on a
planet that does not easily support human life, in an other-
wise inhospitable solar system. We need to support each other
above all else, irrespective of such differences as gender, race,
and nationality. The big problems that humanity faces, such
as the climate crisis, will impact all of us and require our com-
bined effort.
Diversity: We are all unique, and we should celebrate these
differences. They are beautiful and a part of our humanity.
Responsibility: Only humans have the power of knowledge,
so we are responsible for other species. For example, we are
responsible for whales rather than the other way round.
Non-violence: Mental or bodily harm reduces or removes
our ability to contribute to humanity. We must avoid it wher-
ever possible.
178 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Mindfulness: Our brain is capable of a broad range of emo-
tions, but when they hijack us, we lose our capacity to think
rationally. Mindfulness is the ability to experience our emo-
tions while retaining our ability to analyze issues and come up
with creative solutions.
Joyfulness: While we are capable of many emotions, moments
of joy are what makes life worth living.
Criticism: When we see something that could be improved,
we need to have the ability to express that. Individuals, compa-
nies, and societies that do not allow criticism become stagnant
and ultimately fail.
Innovation: Beyond criticism, the major mode for improve-
ment is to create new ideas, products, and art. Without innova-
tion, systems become stagnant and start to decay.
Optimism: We need to believe that problems can be solved.
Without optimism, we will stop trying, and problems like the
climate crisis will become bigger until they threaten human
extinction.
These values can help us think through the moral problems we
face as we enter the Knowledge Age. That will make a good
subject for a separate book, so here is just one example: Should
we kill animals to feed ourselves? One answer is that we stop
eating meat and become vegetarian or vegan; another is that
we work out how to grow meat in a lab.
Both are valid answers under the humanist approach.
Continuing to eat animals without working on alternatives—
standing still with the status quo, in which we do not live up to
our responsibility—is not.
CONCLUSION 179
Conclusion
We need to act with great urgency during this transition to the
Knowledge Age. We are woefully behind in dealing with the
climate crisis, and there is a real possibility that as its conse-
quences unfold, society will degenerate into violence. In the
longer term, we face a potential threat from the possible rise
of superintelligences, and there is also a chance that we are
not alone in this universe. These are risks that we can only
deal with if we stop clinging to the Industrial Age and instead
embrace the Knowledge Age. Conversely, if we are able to
make the transition, huge opportunities lie ahead of us.
A DANGEROUS SPIRAL
The world is rapidly being pulled apart by people who want to
take us back to the past, as well as people who are advancing
technology while being trapped in Industrial Age thinking. As I
described in the introduction, technology increases the space
of the possible, but it does not automatically make everyone
better off. Bound to an Industrial Age logic, automation is cur-
rently enriching a few, while putting pressure on large sections
of society. Nor does digital publishing automatically accelerate
the knowledge loop—we find ourselves in a world plagued by
fake news and filter bubbles.
180 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Those who are trying to take us back into the past are
exploiting these trends. They promise those negatively affected
by technology that everything will be better, while invest-
ing heavily in mass manipulation. They seek to curtail the
open internet, while simultaneously building up secret sur-
veillance. This is true on both sides of the American political
spectrum. Neither the Republicans nor the Democrats have
a truly forward-looking platform, and both favor governmental
controls over online platforms and speech, instead of
empowering end-users as described in the section on infor-
mational freedom.
The net effects of this are an increase in polarization and a
breakdown of critical inquiry and democracy. As disturbing as
it is, the possibility of large-scale violent conflict, both within
and between nations, is increasing, while the climate crisis
wreaks havoc on industrial and food supply chains around the
world. At the same time, our ability to solve the problem of
climate change is decreasing, because we are spiraling back
toward the past directing our attention to nationalism.
TRANSHUMANS, NEOHUMANS AND
SUPERINTELLIGENCE
There’s another reason for urgency in navigating the transi-
tion to the Knowledge Age: We find ourselves on the threshold
of creating both transhumans and neohumans. Transhumans
are humans with capabilities enhanced through both genetic
modification (for example, via CRISPR gene editing) and dig-
ital augmentation (for example, the brain-machine interface
Neuralink). Neohumans are machines with artificial general
intelligence. I’m including them both here because both can be
full-fledged participants in the knowledge loop.
CONCLUSION 181
Both transhumans and neohumans may eventually become
a form of superintelligence, and pose a threat to humanity. The
philosopher Nick Bostrom published a book on the subject,
and he and other thinkers warn that a superintelligence could
have catastrophic results. Rather than rehashing their argu-
ments here, I want to pursue a different line of inquiry: What
would a future superintelligence learn about humanist values
from our current behavior?
As we have seen, we’re not doing terribly well on the cen-
tral humanist value of critical inquiry. We’re also not treating
other species well, our biggest failing in this area being indus-
trial meat production. Here, as with many other problems
that humans have created, I believe the best way forward is
innovation. I’m excited about lab-grown meat and plant-based
meat substitutes. Improving our treatment of other species
is an important way in which we can use the attention freed
up by automation.
Even more important, however, is our treatment of other
humans. This has two components: how we treat each other
now, and how we will treat the new humans when they arrive.
As for how we treat each other now, we have a long way to go.
Many of my proposals are aimed at freeing humans so they
can discover and pursue their personal interests and purpose,
while existing education and job loop systems stand in oppo-
sition to this freedom. In particular, we need to construct the
Knowledge Age in a way that allows us to overcome, rather
than reinforce, our biological differences which have been
used as justification for so much existing discrimination and
mistreatment. That will be a crucial model for transhuman
and neohuman superintelligences, as they will not have our
biological constraints.
Finally, how will we treat the new humans? This is a difficult
question to answer because it sounds so preposterous. Should
182 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
machines have human rights? If they are humans, then they
clearly should. My approach to what makes humans human—
the ability to create and make use of knowledge—would also
apply to artificial general intelligence. Does an artificial general
intelligence need to have emotions in order to qualify? Does it re-
quire consciousness? These are difficult questions to answer but
we need to tackle them urgently. Since these new humans will
likely share little of our biological hardware, there is no reason
to expect that their emotions or consciousness should be similar
to ours. As we charge ahead, this is an important area for further
work. We would not want to accidentally create a large class of
new humans, not recognize them, and then mistreat them.
THE FERMI PARADOX AND ALIEN VISITORS
I want to provide one final reason for urgency in getting to the
Knowledge Age. It is easy for us to think of ourselves as the
center of the universe. In early cosmology, we put the Earth at
the center before we eventually figured out that we live on a
small planet circling a star, in a galaxy that lies in an undistin-
guished location in an incomprehensibly large universe. More
recently, we have discovered that the universe contains a great
many planets more or less like ours, which means some form
of intelligent life may have arisen elsewhere. This possibility
leads to many fascinating questions, one of which is known as
the Fermi paradox: If there is so much potential for intelligent
life in the universe, why have we not yet picked up any signals?
There are different possible answers to this question. For
instance, perhaps civilizations get to a point similar to ours
and then destroy themselves because they cannot make a
crucial transition. Given the way we are handling our current
transition, that seems like a distinct possibility. Maybe all
CONCLUSION 183
intelligent civilizations encounter a problem that they cannot
solve, such as the climate crisis, and either disappear entirely
or suffer a collapse in knowledge and technology. Given the
scale of cosmic time and space, short-lived broadcast civiliza-
tions like ours would be unlikely to be detected in any small
spatiotemporal range.
Furthermore, while climate change is a clear and present
danger, there are also many other species-level challenges
(Ord, 2021).
A different answer to the Fermi paradox would present a
different challenge: More advanced civilizations may have gone
dark so as to not be discovered and destroyed by even more
advanced civilizations. By that account, we may be entering a
particularly dangerous period, in which we have been broad-
casting our presence but do not yet have the means to travel
through space.
OPPORTUNITIES IN THE KNOWLEDGE AGE
Conversely, it is worth asking what kind of opportunities we
might explore in the Knowledge Age. To begin with, there is
a massive opportunity for automation. Fifty years or so after
a successful transition to the Knowledge Age, I expect the
amount of attention trapped in the job loop to have shrunk to
around 20 percent or less of all human attention. This is com-
parable to the shrinkage of attention focused on agriculture
during the Industrial Age. We will finally be able to achieve the
level of freedom that many thinkers had previously predicted,
such as Keynes in his essay “The Economic Possibilities for
our Grandchildren,” where he wrote about humanity coming
to enjoy a life of mostly leisure. Even Marx envisioned such a
world, although he believed it would be brought about differ-
184 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
ently. He wrote about a system that “makes it possible for me
to do one thing today and another tomorrow, to hunt in the
morning, fish in the afternoon, rear cattle in the evening, criti-
cize after dinner, just as I have a mind, without ever becoming
hunter, fisherman, herdsman or critic.” (Marx, 1845) That is
the promise of the Knowledge Age.
But there are many more opportunities for human progress,
including space travel. One of the most depressing moments
in my life came early on when I learned that at some point
our sun will burn out and, in the process, annihilate all life on
Earth. What is the point of anything we do if everything will
come to an end anyhow? Thankfully I came to realize that with
enough knowledge and progress, humanity could become a
spacefaring species and live on other planets, before eventually
traveling to the stars.
A third opportunity is the elimination of disease. It is
sometimes easy to forget how far we have already come on
that account. Many of the diseases that used to cripple or kill
people have either become treatable or have been eliminated.
We have started to make major progress in fighting cancer, and
I believe there is a good chance that most cancers will become
treatable within the next couple of decades. Ultimately this
raises the question of mortality. Can, and should, we strive
to become immortal? I believe we should, although achieving
immortality will bring new problems. These are not the ones
of overpopulation that some people imagine, as birth rates will
be falling and there is, of course, space beyond our planet. The
real challenge of immortality will be maintaining the function-
ing of the knowledge loop, as we will have to figure out not just
how to keep the body alive but the mind flexible. Max Planck
captured this challenge in his famous quote that “science ad-
vances one funeral at a time”—the older, dominant positions
do not allow new theories to displace them.
CONCLUSION 185
A fourth opportunity is to go from capital being merely
sufficient to capital being abundant. By the definitions set
out earlier, that would mean that the marginal cost of capital
was zero. The best way to imagine what that might look like
is to think of the replicator from Star Trek. Imagine a microwave
oven that instead of heating up a dish makes it from
scratch, without requiring you to shop for the ingredients
first. Such an abundance of capital might seem a preposterous
idea that could never be achieved, but for most physical as-
sembly processes today, the factors that limit the rate are the
energy required and the need for humans to operate parts of
the system. Machine learning is helping with the second fac-
tor, but progress on energy has been slow: We don’t yet have
any fusion reactors that output more energy than is used to
start the fusion, but there is no fundamental reason that can’t
be achieved. With enough knowledge, we will make nuclear
fusion work, removing the second major barrier to the abun-
dance of capital.
THE CHALLENGE AHEAD
We live in a period where there is an extraordinary range of
possible outcomes for humanity. They include the annihilation
of humankind in a climate catastrophe at one extreme, and
the indefinite exploration of the universe at the other. Where
we end up depends on the large and small choices each of us
makes every day, from how we treat each other in conversa-
tion to how we tackle the climate crisis. It is a massive chal-
lenge, and I wake up every day both scared and excited about
this moment of transition. I sincerely hope that The World
After Capital makes a small contribution to getting us to the
Knowledge Age.
186 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Acknowledgments
The principles in The World After Capital are the basis for the
Eutopia Foundation, which was started by myself and my wife
Susan Danziger. Eutopia’s mission is to spread Humanism
through building replicable models for making the world a
better place. Without Susan’s partnership, support and critical
feedback, I would never have been able to write this book.
I am grateful to all the people who have helped me along
the way: my parents, who wholeheartedly supported my in-
terest in computers at a time when it was quite unusual and
expensive to do so; my wife Susan Danziger and our chil-
dren, Michael, Katie and Peter, who make me a better per-
son; my many teachers, including Erik Brynjolfsson and Bengt
Holmström, from whom I learned so much; my partners at
Union Square Ventures, starting with Fred Wilson and Brad
Burnham, who invited me to join the firm they had started; the
many entrepreneurs I have had the opportunity to work with;
the philosophers and scientists, such as David Deutsch and
Chiara Marletto, who have demonstrated the power of human
knowledge; the friends who have been there through good and
bad times; and the many people who have taken the time to
comment on the book and on my blog, who have invited me
to speak, who have contributed in ways small and large, with
special mentions for Ed Cooke for some of the earliest feed-
back, Seth Schulman for work on an early draft, Basil Vetas for
capable research assistance, Nick Humphrey for goldilocks ed-
iting, Paul Reeves for intellectual pushback, Mona Alsubaei for
perceptive feedback and crucial contributions to finishing the
book, and Max Roser and the team at the Our World in Data
project for their extensive data collection and visualization.
APPENDIX 187
Appendix
The goal of this appendix is to provide additional data and arguments
for why capital is sufficient, i.e. there is enough capital
to meet everyone’s needs. Again, capital here specifically refers
to physical capital, such as machines and infrastructure. It is
physical capital which produces the solutions to our needs,
such as clothes and buildings.
There are three sections. The first section presents some
general data on the development of global capital, showing
the tremendous growth that has been accomplished over the
last one hundred years. The second section uses data from
World War II to show what can be accomplished when there
is enough political will to redirect capital toward specific goals.
Put differently, the bulk of capital available today is used in the
service of wants, giving us a lot of room to meet needs. Finally,
the third section dives deeper into each of the needs.
THE GROWTH OF CAPITAL
It turns out to be surprisingly difficult to find global data on
physical capital. The best source I have been able to locate is
the World Bank, which publishes a data series on gross capital
formation (World Bank, 2020). Unfortunately, the data here
reaches back only to 1970, but it still shows an increase from
188 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
roughly $5 trillion to $22 trillion in 2019 (this is measured on
constant 2010 dollars, i.e. adjusted for inflation).
For triangulation, it is worth considering the growth in
output of some things that require productive capacity. We can
infer the availability of physical capital through outputs. To
that end, I was able to find the following chart of global crude
steel production over time (Morfeldt, 2017).
Compared to gross capital, there is only about a twofold
growth here from 1970 to today, but it is important to keep in
mind that during that time period we have come up with many
materials other than steel from which to make things, such as
25
20
15
10
5
0
Trillion
Gross Capital Formation (constant 2010 US$)
1970 2020
2010
2000
1990
1980
Source: World Bank, 2020
2000
1500
1000
500
0
Million tons
1900 2020
1980 2000
1960
1940
1920
Global Steel Production
Source: International Iron and Steel Institute 1991, 2001; Worldsteel Committee on
Economic Studies, 2011; World Steel Association, 2021
APPENDIX 189
aluminum and, of course, plastics. Importantly, though, this
graph lets us compare steel output today with output at the
time of World War II, and we can see that there has been more
than an order of magnitude growth (roughly 15x).
What about finished goods production? This, too, is a
good proxy for the amount of total available physical capital.
A great example is the global production of cars. Here is a
chart that shows it over time going back to the earliest days
of the industry.
Again, we can see a roughly twofold increase relative to
the 1970s and a greater than 10x increase if we go back further.
This chart has an important feature worth pointing out now:
There is a dip to near zero production in the mid-1940s corre-
sponding to World War II.
Here is a dramatic example of what all this productive capacity
makes possible. The first commercially available hand-
held mobile phone was the Motorola DynaTAC 8000x which
became available in 1984 (“Motorola DynaTAC,” 2021). Here
is the growth of mobile phones since then, measured in active
subscriptions (Statista, 2020).
100000
75000
50000
25000
0
Thousands of vehicles
2020
2010
2001
1991
1981
1971
1961
1955
1939
1930
1929
1910
1900
Rest of the world United States
World Motor Vehicle Production
Source: Chamber of Commerce of the United States, 1973; Bureau of Transportation
Statistics, 2017
190 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Over the course of three decades, we basically went from
not having mobile phones to having more than the global
population (this of course brings to mind William Gibson’s
great quote that “[t]he future is already here—it’s just not
evenly distributed”—with many people having one mobile
phone for work and one for personal use, for example, while
others have none).
And here is one more example that’s highly relevant to the
climate crisis: the rate at which we have produced solar panels
(Statista, 2021a).
Over a decade and a half, we went from basically making no
panels to making 150 gigawatts in new panels on what looks
492
318
10,000
7,500
5,000
2,500
0
Millions
56
91
145
215
740
2,745
7,511
1,159
1,418
1,765
2,205
3,368
4,030
4,640
5,290
5,890
6,261
6,661
6,996
7,181
962
94 19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
09
08
07
06
05
04
03
02
01
00
99
98
97
96
95
7,814
7,911
8,304
Number of Mobile (Cellular) Subscriptions Worldwide
from 1994 to 2019 (in millions)
Source: Statista, 2020
150,000
100,000
50,000
0
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
09
08
07
06
05
04
03
02
01
Megawatts
Source: Statista, 2021a
Annual Solar Module Production Globally from
2001 to 2019 (in megawatts)
APPENDIX 191
like an exponential growth trajectory. Now, crucially, we are
currently using a small part of our productive capital to make
solar panels. How do we know this? Because we have not yet
taken the drastic steps necessary for fighting the climate crisis,
which will eventually have to reach levels similar to the capital
deployment in World War II.
CAPITAL DEPLOYMENT IN WORLD WAR II
The prior section provided some data on how much physical
capital has grown in the last one hundred years. When mea-
sured by certain proxies, such as the production of steel, it
looks like about a 30x growth in capital over the last 100 years
and a nearly 100x growth if one goes back just two decades fur-
ther to 1900. We also saw that significant growth has occurred
since World War II, which—as a first approximation—is
growth by at least one order of magnitude (10x).
Some might suggest that this growth could all be due to
the population explosion, but that’s not the case. Over the
same timeframe, the global population has grown a lot less:
from 1900 to today, a bit less than 5x, and from the end of
World War II to today, only by a bit more than 3x. Put differ-
ently, the increase in physical capital has far outstripped popu-
lation growth (Our World in Data, 2019).
Others might still question whether this capital is suffi-
cient to meet everyone’s needs, as I have asserted. Some of
the strongest evidence for my claim comes from considering
what happened during World War II. During the war years
US government share of GDP rose to nearly fifty percent
(Casais, 2010).
Let’s dive a bit deeper and look at the manufacturing efforts.
The US ramped production of tanks, airplanes, battleships, and
192 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
guns at an extraordinary clip in the war years. Here is a table that
tabulates this for different weapons systems (Harrison, 1998).
1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 Total
USA
No. of months
– – 1 12 12 12 8 45
Thousands
Rifles, carbines
– – 38 1,542.00 5,683.00 3,489.00 1,578.00 12,330.00
Machine pistols – – 42 651 686 348 207 1,934.00
Machine guns – – 20 662 830 799 303 2,614.00
Guns – – 3 188 221 103 34 549
Mortars – – 0.4 11 25.8 24.8 40.1 102.1
Tanks and SPG – – 0.9 27 38.5 20.5 12.6 99.5
Combat aircraft – – 1.4 24.9 54.1 74.1 37.5 192
Major naval
vessels
– – 544 1,854.00 2,654.00 2,247.00 1,513.00 8,812.00
Total per years 0 0 649.7 4,959.90 10,192.40 7,105.40 3,725.20 26,632.60
UK
No. of months
4 12 12 12 12 12 8 72
Thousands
Rifles, carbines
18 81 79 595 910 547 227 2,457.00
Machine pistols – – 6 1,438.00 1,572.00 672 231 3,919.00
Machine guns 19 102 193 284 201 125 15 939
Guns 1 10 33 106 118 93 28 389
Mortars 1.3 7.6 21.7 29.2 17.1 19 5 100.9
Tanks and SPG 0.3 1.4 4.8 8.6 7.5 4.6 2.1 29.3
Combat aircraft 1.3 8.6 13.2 17.7 21.2 22.7 9.9 94.6
Major naval
vessels
57 148 236 239 224 188 64 1,156.00
Total per years 97.9 358.6 586.7 2717.5 3070.8 1671.3 582 9,084.80
USSR
No. of months
– – 6 12 12 12 8 50
Thousands
Rifles, carbines
– – 1,567.00 4,049.00 3,436.00 2,450.00 637 12,139.00
Machine pistols – – 90 1,506.00 2,024.00 1,971.00 583 6,174.00
Machine guns – – 106 356 459 439 156 1,516.00
Guns – – 30 127 130 122 72 481
Mortars – – 42.3 230 69.4 7.1 3 351.8
Tanks and SPG – – 4.8 24.4 24.1 29 20.5 102.8
Combat aircraft – – 8.2 21.7 29.9 33.2 19.1 112.1
Major naval
vessels
– 33 62 19 13 23 11 161
Total per years 0 33 1,910.30 6,333.10 6,185.40 5,074.30 1501.6 21,037.70
APPENDIX 193
The numbers here are staggering. For example, in 1943 the
US built 2,654 major naval vessels. That’s more than seven
every day, or roughly one every three and a half hours! In 1944,
the US built over 74,000 combat aircraft, that’s about 8.5 com-
bat aircraft every hour.
We are not talking about simple devices here. These are
complex high-performance systems with many components
(think of the aircraft engines alone). And that’s just the US
production. There were efforts of similar scale in Germany, Japan,
the UK, and Russia. For example, adding up all the com-
bat aircraft production in 1944 comes to 185,000 units, which
is 21 aircraft every hour.
Now, while all of this production was happening, people
in the US were not starving, there was enough clothing, and
they were doing surprisingly well overall (Henderson, 2015).
But as we saw earlier, the production of cars dropped dramat-
ically—so how were people’s transportation needs met during
this time? Through a massive increase in public transportation
(Fetherston et al., n.d.). The connection was made quite explic-
itly with the government running ads such as “When you ride
alone, you ride with Hitler” (The U.S. National Archives and
Records Administration, n.d.). This is a perfect illustration of
separating a need—transportation—from its solutions, in this
case individual versus shared mobility.
The continued ability to meet needs while at the same time
repurposing half or more of physical capital strongly supports
the claim of sufficient capital. As a first approximation, much
of that capital was previously used to meet wants. And it went
back to meeting wants after World War II, which partially
explains the tremendous economic boom of the post-war years.
All of this is to say that today’s economy with at least an
order of magnitude more capital than during World War II can
easily meet our needs. Importantly, it also means that we have
194 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
plenty of additional capacity that could be allocated to solving
the climate crisis. For example, we could dramatically ramp up
production of everything from solar panels to nuclear reactors
to heat pumps.
But there is more to be gleaned from what happened to
production during World War II. It isn’t just that we collec-
tively made a lot of complicated stuff rapidly. We also inno-
vated on extremely compressed time scales. The Manhattan
Project is the most obvious example of that, which in a span
of three years developed the nuclear bomb. It is hard to ex-
aggerate how extensive this effort was, including for example
uranium mining, as well as the exploration of several different
bomb designs.
Important technologies were either invented or signifi-
cantly advanced during World War II (Dickson, 2016). For ex-
ample, at the beginning of the war, radar was a nascent techno­
logy. Toward the end of the war, through the invention of
the cavity magnetron, the Allies managed to build radars small
and lightweight enough to put on planes (“Cavity Magnetron,”
2021). Penicillin, which had been discovered in 1928, was not
widely used until mass production was unlocked as part of a
secretive effort during World War II (“Penicillin,” 2021).
Production and deployment at high volume also drove im-
portant improvements. Take fighter planes: Early models had
limited range, which meant bombers had to fly into enemy ter-
ritory without escorts. Their only defense against local fighters
were plane-mounted machine guns. It was only as the war went
on that escort fighters of sufficient range were developed to
accompany bombers (“Escort Fighter,” 2021). This was made
possible by a combination of technological advances, such as
more powerful engines, and the insights gained from battle.
So what are the key takeaways? First, during peacetime
mode much of the capital is used to meet wants, not needs.
APPENDIX 195
Second, when switched into wartime mode, much of the
productive capital can be redirected quickly toward accom-
plishing specific goals that are different from needs. This
was already true at a much lower amount of physical capital
per capita than is available today. Third, innovation can in
fact be accelerated dramatically by focusing resources on
critical problems.
The obvious threat we are facing today that requires a mas-
sive reallocation of, and improvement in, capital is the climate
crisis. Whether this can be accomplished is determined en-
tirely by what we choose to pay attention to. Hence, the defin-
ing scarcity of our age is attention, not capital.
MEETING HUMANITY’S NEEDS
The overall physical capital statistics provided earlier ab-
stract away any regional differences. The examination of
World War II showed that the US was able to meet people’s
needs with a fraction of the available capital, but obviously
that wasn’t true elsewhere. In particular, much physical capital
was of course destroyed in the actual war zones, result-
ing in needs going unmet. In the following discussion, we
will see again that capital is not yet sufficient everywhere.
Given the total amount of aggregate physical capital avail-
able now, that is a distribution problem (which is really an
attention-scarcity problem). Paraphrasing a famous William
Gibson quote: Capital is already sufficient, it is just not yet
evenly distributed.
Furthermore I should caveat that I am providing a mix of
statistics, anecdotes, and arguments. My goal is not to make
an incontrovertible case that capital is sufficient. I doubt
this would be possible even with a lot more time, given the
196 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
limited state of measurement of much of the world’s capital.
Incidentally, I believe that eventually this paucity of data will
be something humanity will look back on in surprise, much
as we sometimes wonder how things worked before we had
mobile phones. Thankfully, Max Roser, Hannah Ritchie, and
the rest of the team at Our World in Data are starting to make
a dent here. Instead, I am simply aiming to make a case that’s
compelling enough to bolster the overall argument that atten-
tion has now become humanity’s critical scarcity.
In the following, the passage from the “Needs” section is in
italics, followed by an examination of the sufficiency of capital.
I cover both individual and collective needs, as well as what
I call enablers (e.g., energy). Along the way, I will also often
point out how our lack of attention to the climate crisis and
other problems may result in capital becoming scarce again
in the future.
Oxygen. On average, humans need about 550 liters of oxygen
every day (“How Much Oxygen Does a Person Consume in a Day?”
2000), depending on the size of our body and physical exertion. Our
most common way of meeting this need is breathing air. Although
that may sound obvious, we have developed other solutions through
technology—for example, the blood of patients struggling to breathe
can be oxygenated externally.
There is no shortage of oxygen in the Earth’s atmosphere.
Throughout industrialization, the issue has been air pollu-
tion. For example, in London the air was so bad that the Great
Smog of 1952 killed four thousand people in the span of less
than a week (Smog Kills Thousands in England, 2020). More
recently, it has been Indian and Chinese cities that are expe-
riencing similar levels of air pollution. This can definitely be
seen as an example of a local insufficiency of capital. In the
APPENDIX 197
more developed countries, the passage of clean air acts forced
the installation of catalytic converters, a switch from coal to
gas heat, etc., and largely resolved this deficiency. These same
and even more advanced technologies (e.g., electric vehicles)
can be deployed globally. China has already taken crucial steps
in this direction, with the province of Hainan setting a 2030
deadline for all new and replacement vehicles to be emission-
free (Xue, 2019).
We should not, however, take the earth’s atmosphere for
granted. Many different phenomena resulted in the existence
and maintenance of today’s breathable atmosphere. For ex-
ample, the Earth’s magnetic field protects it from the solar
winds which would otherwise tear off large parts of the atmo-
sphere (“Solar Wind,” 2021). A reduction in or even loss of
the magnetic field is exactly the kind of long-tail “Black Swan”
type of event that we do not pay nearly enough attention to
as humanity.
Water. We need to ingest two to three liters of water per day to
stay hydrated, depending on factors such as body size, exertion, and
temperature. In addition to drinking water and fluids that contain
it, we have other solutions for this, such as the water contained in
the foods that we eat.
As with oxygen, there is no shortage of water on Earth. The
challenge is access to drinkable water, which means sufficiently
clean and desalinated water. Here too we can see how at an
earlier point in development, capital was insufficient. London
again serves as a great example: Frequent cholera outbreaks
were the result of water wells that were not separated from
sewage. John Snow famously documented the connection by
establishing a detailed map in the 1854 outbreak which helped
to overcome the prior “miasma” theory of cholera and ultima
198 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
tely resulted in London building out an elaborate water infrastructure
(“1854 Broad Street Cholera Outbreak,” 2021).
A more recent example is the water crisis in Flint,
Michigan, where lead from old pipes resulted in toxic drink-
ing water (“Flint Water Crisis,” 2021). So we can see how
capital has been insufficient here and is still insufficient in
some parts of the world, not because of some fundamental
lack of technology or capital, but rather because of a failure
of attention to clean water access. The World Bank has come
up with an estimate of only about $28 billion annually to pro-
vide everyone in the world with basic water, sanitation, and
hygiene, and about $114 billion to make these services avail-
able continuously (Hutton, 2016). These surprisingly low
numbers show how little physical capital would need to be
deployed. Clean drinking water is a great example of the type
of problem where markets tend to fail, and hence attention
allocation needs to happen through other processes (e.g., by
electing a capable city government).
Calories. To power our bodies, adults need between 1,500 and
3,200 calories per day (U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, 2015), a need we
mainly meet by eating and drinking. The best way to obtain calories,
however, is surprisingly poorly understood—the mix between pro-
teins, lipids, and carbohydrates is subject to debate.
Eating food is the primary solution to our need for calories.
This is where Malthus expected the big shortfall to come from.
Agriculture simply wouldn’t be able to keep up with the growth
in population. The big breakthrough that he didn’t anticipate
was the Haber-Bosch process of nitrogen fixation, which pow-
ered the so-called green revolution. Equipped with artificial
nitrogen fertilizer, agricultural output soared.
APPENDIX 199
The other big win in agriculture was the use of machinery.
Today in the US, only 1.3% of the employed population works
in agriculture, and the entire food supply system at $1.1 trillion
represents only 5% of total GDP (Lepley, 2019; USDA, n.d.).
Even in countries like India that are further back in develop-
ment, the percentage of the population engaged in farming has
been shrinking, a decline made possible by the availability of
sufficient physical capital (Shrinivasan, 2013).
Clearly not everyone has access to enough calories to meet
their needs. For example, starvation is ravaging Yemen right
now as a result of the ongoing war there. Overall, however, since
the 1970s, the incidence of death from famine has been at his-
toric lows (Hasell, 2013). And even before that, as Amartya Sen
and others have documented, many famines resulted from a
failure to distribute food, not an absolute lack of it (with exam-
ples of rotting supplies in harbors while people starve nearby).
Here too, though, we cannot rest on our accomplishments.
The biggest risk to humanity’s ability to meet everyone’s need
for calories is the climate crisis which is disrupting the rela-
tively stable weather patterns required by agriculture. So far,
we have been experiencing crop failures only locally and some-
times regionally. A global large-scale crop failure would result
in starvation as we have very limited stockpiles.
Nutrients. The body cannot synthesize all the materials it requires,
including a couple of certain fatty acids, some amino acids, as well
as a few vitamins and minerals—these are called “essential” and
must be obtained as part of our nutrition. This is another area that
is surprisingly poorly understood, meaning there is little consensus
regarding the mix of nutrients we need to take in.
Nutrients, while important, are needed in relatively small
amounts. For example, the daily recommended amount for
200 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) is between 0.5 and 1.6 grams (National
Institutes of Health, 2021). The biggest intake requirements
are the essential amino acids, with adults probably needing
about 7 grams daily of Leucine as one example (Appleby, 2018).
For minerals and vitamins, we are talking about even smaller
amounts. These are mostly in the milligram and microgram
range with the exception of calcium, chloride, and sodium,
which are needed in a few grams each (Romine, 2019).
The cost and capital required to produce all of these essen-
tial nutrients has been declining substantially over time as a
result of scientific and engineering progress. For example, we
have recently figured out how to grow rice that has more vita-
min A in it, called “golden rice” (Dubock, 2019). More than half
the global population eats rice daily, so having it deliver enough
vitamin A is a major way of ensuring sufficient amounts of that
essential nutrient are available.
Once again, capital is not the binding constraint today.
But as the example of golden rice shows, it will continue to
be important to innovate so as to better meet nutrient needs
for everyone and not just for those who can currently afford
to buy every possible supplement by walking into the nearest
drug store. Further research is also required to understand
which nutrients we really need and in what dosage for humans
to thrive and live long, healthy lives.
Discharge. We also need to get things out of our bodies by expel-
ling processed food, radiating heat, and exhaling carbon dioxide.
Humans have made a great deal of progress around meeting our
discharge needs, such as toilets and public sanitation.
Building public sanitation systems is one of the major contrib-
utors to improvements in life expectancy. As Steven Johnson
documents in his books The Ghost Map (2007) and Extra Life
APPENDIX 201
(2021) the city of London was hit by repeated cholera outbreaks
until it separated sewage from fresh water delivery. Even back
in the mid-1800s, London had sufficient capital to build out a
large-scale sewer system (“London Sewerage System,” 2021).
In many countries we take this for granted today, but there
are still places in the world that have insufficient sewage
treatment capacity. Globally, the number of people without
access to proper sanitation has been declining, albeit slowly
(Ritchie & Roser, 2021). That’s largely due to the fact that a
lack of sanitation exists predominantly in the places with the
highest population growth. Still, at this point, about two-thirds
of the global population has access to sanitation, and the total
number of people who do has grown by several billion in the
last couple of decades. This has been possible as the overall
capital required for achieving sufficient sanitation is relatively
low and again has been declining with technological progress
(García, 2009).
Sanitation provides another example of how a lack of atten-
tion to the right problems puts our ability to meet our needs
at risk. Right here in New York City, for example, raw sewage
spills into the East and Hudson Rivers during heavy down-
pours because of insufficient capacity in the rainwater runoff
systems (Chaisson, 2017). With the climate crisis accelerating,
the frequency of that kind of heavy rainfall is increasing rapidly
(Climate Central, 2019).
Temperature. Our bodies can self-regulate their temperature,
but only within a limited range of environmental temperature and
humidity. Humans can easily freeze to death or die of overheating
(we cool our bodies through sweating, also known as “evaporative
cooling,” which stops working when the air gets too hot and humid).
We therefore often need to help our bodies with temperature regulation
by controlling our environment. Common strategies to
202 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
meet our temperature needs include clothing, shelter, heating and
air conditioning.
We have long had enough capital to provide everyone in the
world with clothing. This problem is strictly a matter of dis-
tribution. Some people don’t have the financial resources, or
they live in circumstances such as homelessness that make
it difficult for them to acquire and maintain sufficient cloth-
ing. Conversely, people in many advanced economies have
piles of unused clothes and the so-called fast fashion industry
promotes rapid changes in style that result in massive addi-
tional consumption.
But what about shelter? This is a more difficult problem
that requires significantly more capital. Here too the evidence
suggests that we have sufficient physical capital. For example,
it is estimated that in 2015 we already had over 220 billion
square meters of buildings globally (UNEP & GABC, 2017).
This amounts to 30 square meters per person. Of course, some
part of that is commercial and industrial space, but this still
shows that as a first approximation we can house everyone.
Even more impressive is the rate at which we are adding space.
The same report estimates that by 2030 we will be at over 300
billion square meters of buildings. We also have a lot of cir-
cumstantial evidence that supports this conclusion. In partic-
ular building booms in various parts of the world, including
China, the US and the Middle East, created vast local oversup-
plies of housing. For instance at the height of the China boom
enough housing was added annually for the equivalent of two
new ten-million-resident cities (Slotta, 2020).
And yet again we encounter the climate crisis as the biggest
threat to our ability to provide adequate shelter to everyone.
In the US alone, nearly 15 million housing units are threatened
by floods, as found by a recently updated federal mapping
APPENDIX 203
exercise (Kaufman et al., 2020). That doesn’t count homes
threatened by forest fires. Over longer time horizons, sea level
rise will make large coastal areas around the world uninhabit-
able. We are already experiencing significant climate refugee
movements today. In 2020 alone, it is estimated that 30 mil-
lion people were displaced globally due to storms and floods
(Global Migration Data Portal, 2021). The forecasts are that by
2050, as many as 1 billion people may need shelter in a new
location (Kamal, 2017).
Can we heat and cool all this space as needed? The capi-
tal requirements here are accelerating rapidly at the moment
due to the unfolding climate crisis which is increasing cool-
ing requirements globally. This is not just a question of
convenience. In hot and humid conditions, evaporative cool-
ing via sweat stops working, and when that happens, people
die from overheating. This is now a regular occurrence in
many parts of the world; even a relatively northern region
such as Europe is affected, with the 2019 heat wave causing
over two thousand deaths (Borunda, 2021; “2019 European
Heat Waves,” 2021).
As of 2020, there are an estimated 1.9 billion AC units in the
world, adding about 110 million units annually at an accelerat-
ing pace (Armstrong, 2020; Holst, 2020). The key constraint
here is not capital but electricity to run all of these new units,
which will be further exacerbated by the need to switch heating
from fossil fuels to electricity. This constraint will be looked at
in the energy section further down.
Pressure. Anybody who has gone diving will be aware that our
bodies do not handle increased pressure very well. The same goes
for decreased pressure, which is one of the reasons why we find air
travel exhausting (airplane cabins maintain pressure similar to
being at the top of an eight-thousand-foot mountain).
204 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Thankfully we need minimal capital to meet our pressure
needs. One might at first assume that we do not need any
capital, but that’s not correct. For example, pretty much all
commercial flights are in altitudes that require pressurized
cabins and hence extra capital above and beyond what would
be required for an unpressurized plane. For instance, at just
12 kilometers of altitude, pressure falls to 0.2 bar (“Cabin
Pressurization,” 2021). At such a low pressure, it is not just
a lack of oxygen that would be fatal, but also decompression
sickness may occur where gases that have been dissolved in the
bloodstream may gas out, resulting in sickness and even death.
As noted earlier, we cannot take the existence of the Earth’s
atmosphere for granted. So in addition to giving thought on
how to create a livable atmosphere on planets such as Mars
that we may eventually want to settle, we need to pay attention
to the various forces that could damage or even destroy the
Earth’s atmosphere.
Light. Most humans would be hard-pressed to achieve much in
complete darkness. For a long time, our need for light was met
mainly by sunlight, but much human ingenuity has gone into the
creation of artificial light sources.
Our ability to make artificial light is one of the great human
achievements as well as a story of ongoing progress. We are the
only species that has the knowledge to make fire, a capability
attributed in Greek mythology to Prometheus, who stole fire
from the gods.
Capital is essential to making light, from the earliest time
of gathering wood to the modern creation of light-emitting
diodes (LEDs). This progress has meant that light has become
incredibly affordable in most parts of the world and consump-
tion has gone up accordingly (for example, in the UK by four
APPENDIX 205
orders of magnitude over the last two hundred years) (Roser,
2013). Even in extremely poor countries that lack electrical
infrastructure, so-called “offgrid solar” is revolutionizing the
availability of light, replacing the burning of kerosene and
other dangerous fuels. In summary, we are definitely not con-
strained by capital when it comes to our need for light.
Healing. Whenever we damage our body, it needs to heal. The
human body comes equipped with extensive systems for self-heal-
ing, but beyond a certain range it needs external assistance. We
have developed many solutions, which are often grouped under the
term “healthcare.”
The primary constraint on healing has been knowledge, rather
than capital. As documented in Steven Johnson’s book Extra
Life, for the longest time, medical interventions tended to
result in worse outcomes as doctors had no idea what they
were doing (Johnson, 2021).
Conversely, today it has become possible to create new life-
saving medicines virtually overnight, as was the case with the
COVID-19 mRNA vaccines. These are super cheap to manufacture
and supply has been held back by artificial limitations
based primarily on intellectual property protection rather than
a scarcity of capital.
It is crucial to understand that much of our current need for
healing could be avoided in the first place by leading healthier
lives. As noted earlier, we do not know as much about nutrition
as we should, but we do know that obesity contributes
significantly to medical problems and yet the rate of obesity
has increased dramatically, especially in the United States.
Similarly, we know that stress is negatively associated with
health, and yet the stress level for many people has gone up for
a range of reasons from economic insecurity to proliferation
206 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
of stress-inducing online content. Overall, the bulk of medical
expenses today is accounted for by chronic conditions, such as
diabetes (CDC, n.d.).
Despite all of this, we can measure our tremendous prog-
ress on healing by considering the increase in life expectancy
(Roser, 2019). Based on historical data, life expectancy in 1800
was well below 40 years across the entire world. By 2015 it had
risen to well over 70 years in many places and to over 80 in
some. Even in Africa, which is the furthest behind, life expec-
tancy in many countries in the 60s.
That of course doesn’t mean we can’t face a great reversal.
COVID-19 provided a glimpse of what that might look like. As
does the decrease in life expectancy in the United States due
to what Anne Case and Angus Deaton have called “deaths of
despair,” which have impacted many groups, but particularly
white middle-aged males (Case & Deaton, 2021). Finally, again
the climate crisis looms large here with deaths ranging from
heat waves to crop failure having the potential to undo much
of the progress we have made.
Learning. When we are born, we are quite incompetent—we
have to learn basic skills, such as walking and how to use even the
simplest tools. When we encounter a new situation, we have to learn
how to deal with it. We group many of the strategies for meeting the
need for learning under the heading “education,” but other solutions
include experimenting to gain experience, self-study and parenting.
There has been tremendous progress in making learning
available to everyone around the world. A crucial enabler of
learning is literacy, and that has grown dramatically over the
last two hundred years. In the early 1800s, fewer than 20% of
people globally were literate (Our World in Data, n.d.). Today,
global literacy is approaching 90%.
APPENDIX 207
It is crucial to recognize that traditional schools are only
one solution to the need for learning. It is a capital-intensive
one as it requires the construction of buildings. There are
many alternative solutions such as unschooling, homeschool-
ing, and neighborhood schools.
Increasingly, pretty much all the world’s knowledge can
be delivered via a smartphone. Global smartphone penetra-
tion is approaching 80% (O’Dea, 2021). Even in relatively poor
countries smartphones are becoming much more widespread.
For example, a new Android phone can be purchased in India
for 7,000 Rupees (~$100) and smartphone penetration there
has reached 42% in 2020 (Mobile Price List In India, n.d.;
Statista, 2021).
The assertion that anything can be learned via a smart-
phone may seem preposterous. But research on so-called
“minimally invasive education” and “unschooling” has shown
that children want to learn and are capable of learning largely
independently when given the right opportunity (“Minimally
Invasive Education,” 2021; “Unschooling,” 2021). Even some
famous scientists, including notably Einstein and Faraday, did
a great deal of independent studying early on, with the latter
having virtually no formal education (“Albert Einstein,” 2021;
“Michael Faraday,” 2021).
Meaning. As humans, we have a profound psychological need
for meaning in our lives. One solution is to have a purpose. Reli-
gious belief and belonging to a community have long been a source
of purpose for humans. Another key strategy comes from our
interactions with other humans, including having other people ac-
knowledge our contributions to a project, or even merely recognize
our existence.
208 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
As stated in the main text, the need for meaning can be met
more or less without capital. Meaning comes from stories, be-
liefs, recognition, and many other sources, none of which have
any substantial capital requirements. These have existed in
oral form long before humans developed written language.
Reproduction. Individuals can survive without sex, but repro-
duction is a need for societies as a whole. We have learned how to
reproduce without sex; in the future, there may be different solutions
for the continuation of a human society—whether here on Earth
or elsewhere.
Historically, we have needed no capital for reproduction. This
has taken an ironic twist as sperm count and motility are drop-
ping in many places around the world (likely due to many
products containing hormone-disrupting chemicals) (Chiu,
2021). So eventually we may need to use technological means
for reproduction. Over the long term, these could also involve
the creation of artificial wombs, something that’s already pos-
sible for animals (Becker, 2017).
Allocation. Access to physical resources has to be allocated. Take a
chair as an example. Only one person can comfortably sit in it at a
time—when there are multiple people, we need a way of allocating
the chair between them. If you are by yourself, you can sit on a chair
whenever you want to—allocation is a collective need.
The need for allocation is more severe the less of some-
thing there is. For example, in the early days of producing
the COVID vaccine, when there were few doses, there were
intense debates about how to allocate the available doses. With
enough progress, we can envision a world with dramatically
reduced allocation needs, where we can always make more of
APPENDIX 209
something on the spot whenever we need it. I believe we are
a long way out from abundance in the physical realm. Even in
Star Trek, which is widely seen as a fictional model of abun-
dance with technology such as the replicator, there are often
allocation needs, such as the captain having to decide whether
to route power to the shields or the weapons or the engines.
It is easy to think of other examples where we will still have
an allocation mechanism, such as going to see the original
Mona Lisa at the Louvre—only so many people can fit in the
room at any one time. In the extreme, some will argue that it
might become possible to give you a Matrix-style experience
where you think you are in the room at the Louvre with the
Mona Lisa but in fact have never left your home. While possible
in principle, I believe this too is a long way off.
At first blush, it might not seem that capital has much to do
with addressing the allocation need, but historically we have
definitely been capital-constrained here. Two crucial parts of
allocation solutions are communication and transportation.
Sticking with the COVID vaccination example, to allocate a
limited number of vaccines, one needs to know where the peo-
ple who should get the early doses are and how to get the doses
to them (or them to the doses). Both of these sub-problems
require capital. In particular because the COVID vaccines need
to be kept at low temperatures, it requires a so-called “cold
chain”—a logistics solution that can keep the vaccine cooled.
Our progress in communication will be discussed more in the
sections on motivation, coordination, and knowledge below.
For transportation, we know we are not really constrained
given the massive amount of stuff (most of which is serving
wants rather than needs) being delivered every day.
Motivation. This may seem like an individual need, but it acts as
a collective one in the sense that societies must motivate their mem-
210 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
bers to carry out important tasks and follow rules. Even the smallest
and least technologically advanced societies have some solutions for
this problem, often in the form of rewards and punishments.
Motivation is another need where at first it might appear as
if capital never really played a role. Yet on further examina-
tion, communication infrastructure is crucial for maintaining
motivation across distance. This partially explains why the
structures of motivation were extremely local prior to the
Industrial Age and the deployment of communication net-
works. Successful larger motivation efforts earlier on, such as
the Roman Empire, invested heavily in roads and/or currier
networks. With communication networks operating at zero
marginal cost today, we are no longer capital-constrained with
regard to motivation even at global scale.
These days, it might be argued that financial capital, e.g.
in the form of bonus payments, is key to motivation. We are
certainly not constrained by a lack of financial capital and we
can even create new financial capital essentially ex nihilo via
cryptocurrencies. Still it is worth pointing out that so-called
“high powered” incentives are a very narrow form of motiva-
tion and require precise measurement to avoid substituting
quantity for quality. This can easily be seen from the many
failed attempts to incentivize the creation of content via pay-
ments in the absence of systems to rate content quality.
Unlocking intrinsic motivation and complementing it with
“low powered” incentives such as recognition and reputation is
a far better approach most of the time. In science, for example,
much progress comes from people’s genuine interest in solv-
ing a specific problem. Wikipedia is a great example of how
much high-quality content creation can happen in a system
built solely on recognition and reputation (this is not to say
that there aren’t bias issues worth addressing, but commercial
APPENDIX 211
publishers time and again have argued that Wikipedia would
run out of steam and it hasn’t).
Coordination. Whenever more than a single human is involved
in any activity, coordination is needed. Take a simple meeting
between two people as an example. In order for it to take place, the
two need to show up at the same place at the same time. We have
developed many communication and governance mechanisms to
address this need.
Coordination may seem like such an abstract need that it can
be difficult to see at first that it was at one point capital-con-
strained. One of our primary solutions to the need for coor-
dination is communication. Considering the simple example
again of two people meeting, this requires agreeing on a place
and time. When communication was really difficult (because
of insufficient capital), a lot of meetings, such as religious
ceremonies, happened on pre-ordained schedules. Another
common solution was simply waiting. People would show up
somewhere and wait until it was their turn.
This latter solution shows a great example of how we
have achieved sufficient capital for coordination only rela-
tively recently. Waiting as a solution to coordination has been
decreasing rapidly in places with high internet penetration. For
example, we now routinely book appointments for a haircut or
make restaurant reservations online. At this point our ability
to coordinate even at the scale of all of humanity is no longer
capital constrained. Instead, most of our coordination prob-
lems now result from disagreements about priorities. That has
been true most recently for fighting the COVID-19 pandemic
and is also true with what to do about the climate crisis.
212 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Knowledge. As I argued in earlier sections on optimism and hu-
manism, knowledge is the central collective human need: Without it,
a society will encounter problems that it cannot solve. History is full
of examples of societies that lacked sufficient knowledge to sustain
themselves, such as the Easter Islanders and the Mayans. This is not
about what any one individual has learned, but about the body of
knowledge that is accessible to society as a whole. Later in this book
we will examine solutions for generating more knowledge, faster.
The accumulation of knowledge was significantly constrained
by capital early on. That’s largely because humans didn’t know
how to make easily writable and transportable materials.
Many ancient cultures engraved writing in stone, which was
both a slow process and made it difficult to transport the re-
sults. There was a series of innovations in recording materi-
als such as parchment (animal skins), papyrus and eventually
paper. To get a sense of just how scarce the more advanced
materials were early on, one only needs to consider the so-
called palimpsest, a manuscript that was written over a prior
one, sometimes repeatedly, in the re-use of the underlying
parchment (“Palimpsest,” 2021). With today’s digital technology
for recording and transmitting knowledge we are no lon-
ger capital constrained with respect to those crucial aspects of
the knowledge loop.
That is not to say that there aren’t some pockets of knowl-
edge left where our ability to push forward is constrained by
capital, but these are few and far between. One example is high
energy physics. The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) is the big-
gest device humanity has built to explore what happens when
particles collide at very high energies to reveal what they are
made of (“Large Hadron Collider,” 2021). It is unclear that we
have accumulated enough physical capital to date (or have the
capacity right now to build enough) for significantly higher
APPENDIX 213
energy levels that would potentially let us see even deeper into
the fabric of reality.
In the meantime though, it is important to point out that,
conversely, a lot of research that used to be capital-con-
strained is no longer so through breakthroughs in both com-
putation (allowing the simulation of much bigger systems)
and laboratory equipment, especially for the sequencing and
assembly of genomic information. This has resulted in an ex-
plosion in knowledge about cellular processes which among
other benefits gave us the powerful new mRNA vaccines
against COVID-19.
Energy. For a long time, humans relied on direct sunlight as their
primary energy source. Since then we have developed many ways
of generating energy, including better ways of capturing sunlight.
Capturing more energy and making it available in a highly concen-
trated and easily controllable form via electricity has enabled new
solutions to human needs.
Energy turns out to be the crucial enabler of progress. The
other enablers identified below, such as resources, are directly
impacted by how much energy we have available. As David
Deutsch has pointed out in The Beginning of Infinity, a suffi-
ciently advanced civilization, with enough energy at their dis-
posal, could assemble entire worlds in seemingly empty space.
We are a long way from such a civilization, but we have
plenty of energy, and more importantly, the ability to rapidly
build out our energy supply if we pay enough attention to it.
Today energy production and consumption vary significantly
across nations, with developed countries having enough energy
far beyond what is required to meet needs. But even in the US,
we occasionally run into energy distribution problems, as seen
recently in Texas.
214 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
More importantly, our global energy production is heavily
dependent on fossil fuels. This of course is the cause of the cli-
mate crisis and something that requires our urgent attention.
So isn’t this an example of capital scarcity? No. We have the
capital necessary to dramatically ramp our clean energy supply,
we simply lack the political will to go into wartime production
mode. We should be expanding wind, solar, geothermal, and
nuclear energy (as well as storage) with a large percentage of
our existing physical capital.
To illustrate what is possible, consider France’s deployment
of nuclear energy in the 1970s and ’80s. France went from vir-
tually no nuclear power to about 40% in the space of less than
two decades (Mearns, 2013). Keep in mind this was during a
peacetime approach to energy. Now imagine what could be
done with a wartime approach. I believe it would be possible
in most countries to get to 100% clean energy in 10 years or
possibly even faster if we really tried.
Finally, there seems to be no particular reason why we can-
not make even more advanced forms of energy work, starting
with nuclear fusion. There’s now at least a dozen well funded
commercial fusion startups pursuing a variety of approaches
from the long-standing magnetic confinement to more re-
cent inertial confinement (using laser). Research has even
continued on the much derided notion of “cold” fusion. Fol-
lowing the reproducibility crisis of the original 1989 paper by
Fleischmann and Pons, research has been continued albeit
under the different headline of “condensed matter physics”
(Krivit & Ravnitzky, 2016). That research has continued to pro-
vide interesting observations that could eventually unlock a
massive energy source for humanity.
Resources. In early human history, all resources were drawn from
our natural surroundings. Later, we started growing and extracting
APPENDIX 215
resources in our own right. Many modern solutions have been made
possible by access to new kinds of resources. For instance, mobile
phones, which provide new solutions to individual and collective
needs, are made possible by some esoteric raw materials, including
the so-called “rare-earth elements.”
One of the consistent worries cited for why we will not be able
to meet our needs are resources, by which I mean raw and inter-
mediate materials. For example, there is a concern now about
running out of phosphorus (Alewell et al., 2020). Historically,
this has not turned out to be the case for several reasons. First,
when a resource becomes more expensive, we often start to dis-
cover new places where we can find it. For instance, there were
repeated concerns that we might run out of oil, but each time we
discovered more. Second, an increase in the price of a resource
tends to lead to product and process designs that make less use
of the resource, either by becoming more efficient or by substi-
tuting another resource. Third, when a resource is sufficiently
expensive, it makes sense to recycle it. For example, in the US
about half of all aluminum beer cans are recycled (EPA, 2021).
Ultimately though, there are far more resources in the uni-
verse than we might ever need. In the relatively near future,
we will be able to catch meteorites, which contain massive
amounts of metals. There are several venture-backed startups
pursuing this, and companies such as SpaceX are driving down
the cost of launching such missions. Longer term though, we
will likely be able to transmute materials. Our techniques for
doing this at the moment are somewhat primitive, but Gleen
Seaborg and others famously turned bismuth into gold in 1981
(Aleklett et al., 1981).
Transformation. Energy and resources alone are not enough. To
enable most solutions, we need to figure out (and remember!) how
216 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
to use the former to transform the latter. This involves chemical
and physical processes. Physical capital, in the shape of machines,
has been a crucial enabler of many new solutions to human needs.
For instance, a knitting machine can quickly transform yarn into
clothing, one of our key solutions for maintaining the human
operating environment.
Some of the earliest human transformation processes were
to make weapons for hunting, such as arrows and knives, by
sharpening wood or stone. Eventually we figured out how to
make metals and developed lots of chemical processes that
combine and transform resources into the materials we use
every day. Many of these processes are capital-intensive.
Yet here, too, it is unlikely that we are meaningfully con-
strained by capital in many parts of the world. One example to
consider here is how much larger cars have become in advanced
economies in recent years. This has been driven by the trend
toward sports utility vehicles (SUV) and so-called crossovers,
which have been dramatically outselling traditional sedans
since 2015 (Motorlease, n.d.). These vehicles require signifi-
cantly more material due to their size. One can give similar
examples from other areas, such as the trend of much larger
houses. By 2014, the average new home in the US had ballooned
to 2,675 square feet from below 1,000 square feet in the 1950s
(while at the same time, average family size shrunk consider-
ably). Put differently, we may have distribution issues, but we do
not have aggregate capital constraint issues in making materials.
It is also worth noting that much of our manufacturing
is still applying highly wasteful processes where one starts
with a big piece of material and then cuts or mills portions
away. In contrast to this, we are now beginning to see additive
manufacturing, sometimes referred to as 3D printing, grow-
ing in capabilities. In this approach, material is deposited to
APPENDIX 217
take on the desired shapes, which allows for a dramatic
reduction in waste.
Transportation. The final foundational enabler is the ability
to move stuff, including people. This is another area in which we
have made great progress, going from human-powered to animal-
powered to machine-powered transportation.
Humanity was capital constrained on transportation for a long
time and still is in some parts of the world. Without some kind
of assistance, we are quite slow (certainly compared to many
other species) and cannot cross sizable bodies of water. Not
surprisingly, much of early human technology was thus aimed
at improving transportation, from domesticating animals such
as horses to inventing the boats and carriages.
The longstanding dream was to fly like birds, and myths
of human flight, such as Daedalus and Icarus, date back thou-
sands of years. But it wound up taking until the early 1900s
to figure it out. From there, progress was rapid, and by 1969
a human had landed on the moon. Following the COVID-19
pandemic, we find ourselves with an excess of equipment with
more planes than ever before parked in the desert, maybe
never to be reactivated.
Today we face two overlapping challenges. Some parts of
the world still need to catch up on transportation, in particu-
lar India and China with their billions of people hankering for
increased mobility. At the same time we need to rapidly decar-
bonize transportation all over the world to combat the climate
crisis. Achieving both will require massive investments in elec-
tric mobility. Ideally new vehicles in India and China will be
predominantly electric, including scooters and trikes. We are
not constrained by capital in accomplishing this but only if we
choose to redeploy a lot of productive capital.
218 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
References
1854 Broad Street cholera outbreak. (2021, July 30). In Wikipedia.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1854_Broad_Street_cholera_out
break
2019 European heat waves. (2021, July 24). In Wikipedia.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2019_European_heat_wave
Ablow, K. (2015, November 18). Was the Unabomber correct? Fox
News. https://www.foxnews.com/opinion/was-the-unabomber-
correct
Albert Einstein. (2021, August 6). In Wikipedia. https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Albert_Einstein#Early_life_and_
education
Aleklett, K, Morrissey, D J, Loveland, W, McGaughey, P L, &
Seaborg, G T. (1981) Energy dependence of
/sup 209/Bi fragmentation in relativistic nuclear collisions.
United States. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.23.1044
Alewell, C., Ringeval, B., Ballabio, C. et al. Global phosphorus
shortage will be aggravated by soil erosion.
Nat Commun 11, 4546 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-
18326-7
Allison, B., & Harkins, S. (2014, November 17). Fixed Fortunes:
Biggest corporate political interests spend billions, get trillions.
Sunlight Foundation. https://sunlightfoundation.com/
2014/11/17/fixed-fortunes-biggest- corporate-political-
interests-spend-billions-get-trillions/
AlphaZero. (2020, September 9). In Wikipedia. https://
en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php? title=AlphaZero&oldid=
977537226
REFERENCES 219
Andrews, E. (2018, September 1). What is the oldest known piece of
music? HISTORY. https://www.history.com/news/what-is-the-
oldest-known-piece-of-music
Appleby, M. (2018, December 7). Recommended Levels of Essential
Amino Acids. SF Gate. https://healthyeating.sfgate.com/
recommended-levels-essential-amino-acids-3649.html
Armstrong, M. (2020, August 27). Air Conditioning Biggest Factor
in Growing Electricity Demand. Statista. https://www.statista.
com/chart/14401/growing-demand-for-air-conditioning-and-
energy/
Ausubel, J. H., Wernick, I. K., & Waggoner, P. E. (2013). Peak
Farmland and the Prospect for Land Sparing. Population and
Development Review, 38, 221–242 https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1728-4457.2013.00561.x
Backman, M. (2020, February 19). You’ll Be Shocked by How Many
Americans Have No Retirement Savings at All. The Motley
Fool. https://www.fool.com/retirement/2020/02/19/youll-be-
shocked-by-how- many-americans-have-no-ret.aspx
Bariso, J. (2020, August 19). Google Has a Plan to Disrupt the
College Degree. Inc.Com. https://www.inc.com/justin-bariso/
google-plan-disrupt-college-degree-university-higher-
education-certificate- project-management-data-analyst.html
BBC News. (2018, November 6). Facebook admits it was used to
“incite offline violence” in Myanmar. https://www.bbc.com/news/
world-asia-46105934
Becker, R. (2017, April 25). An artificial womb successfully grew
baby sheep — and humans could be next. The Verge. https://
www.theverge.com/2017/4/25/15421734/artificial-womb-fetus-
biobag-uterus-lamb-sheep- birth-premie-preterm-infant
Berners-Lee, M. (2019). There Is No Planet B: A Handbook for
the Make or Break Years Iillustrated ed.). Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Bernstein, A., & Raman, A. (2015, June). The Great Decoupling: An
Interview with Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee. Harvard
Business Review. https://hbr.org/2015/06/the-great-decoupling
220 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Berry, S. M., Carlin, B. P., Lee, J. J., & Muller, P. (2010). Bayesian
Adaptive Methods for Clinical Trials (1st ed.). CRC Press.
Bivens, J., & Mishel, L. (2015, September 2). Understanding the
Historic Divergence Between Productivity and a Typical Worker’s
Pay: Why It Matters and Why It’s Real. Economic Policy Insti-
tute. https://www.epi.org/publication/understanding-the-
historic-divergence-between-productivity-and-a-typical-
workers-pay-why-it-matters-and-why-its-real/
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. (2020, May).
Report on the Economic Well-Being of
U.S. Households in 2019 Featuring Supplemental Data from April
2020. Federal Reserve. https://www.federalreserve.gov/publi-
cations/files/2019-report-economic-well-being-us-households-
202005.pdf
Boldrin, M., & Levine, D. K. (2010). Against Intellectual Monopoly
(1st ed.). Cambridge University Press.
Borowiec, S. (2016, March 15). AlphaGo seals 4–1 victory over
Go grandmaster Lee Sedol. The Guardian. https://
www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/15/googles-
alphago-seals-4-1-victory-over-grandmaster- lee-sedol
Borunda, A. (2021, July 2). Heat waves kill people—and climate
change is making it much, much worse. National Geographic.
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/article/
heat-related-deaths- attributed-to-climate-change
British Overseas Airways Corporation. (2020, September 6). In
Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=British_
Overseas_Airways_Corporation&oldid=977094302
Buranyi, S. (2018, February 22). Is the staggeringly profitable
business of scientific publishing bad for science? The Guardian.
https://www.theguardian.com/science/2017/jun/27/profitable-
business-scientific- publishing-bad-for-science
Bureau of Transportation Statistics. (2017, May)._ World Motor
Vehicle Production._ https://www.bts.gov/bts/archive/
publications/national_transportation_statistics/table_01_23
REFERENCES 221
Cabin pressurization. (2021, July 21). In Wikipedia. https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cabin_pressurization
Casais, E. (2010)._ US federal spending as a share of GDP._ Arep-
pim AG. https://stats.areppim.com/stats/stats_usxrecxspendx
gdp.htm
Case, A., & Deaton, A. (2021). Deaths of Despair and the Future
of Capitalism. Princeton University Press. Cavity magnetron.
(2021, June 27). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Cavity_magnetron
CDC. (n.d.). Health and Economic Costs of Chronic Diseases.
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion. Retrieved August 6, 2021, from https://www.cdc.
gov/chronicdisease/about/costs/index.htm
Centers for Disease Control (CDC). (2020, February). Fatal
Injury and Violence Data. CDC. https://www.cdc.gov/injury/
wisqars/fatal.html
Chaisson, C. (2017, December 12). When It Rains, It Pours Raw
Sewage into New York City’s Waterways. NRDC. https://www.
nrdc.org/stories/when-it-rains-it-pours-raw-sewage-new-
york-citys-waterways
Chamber of Commerce of the United States. (1973)._ United
States Multinational Enterprise Survey._ https://books.google.
com.sa/books?id=tPZe7kHHTboC&printsec=frontcover#v=
onepage&q&f=false
Chiu, L. (2021, March 22). Declining sperm counts around the world
could reach zero in just 24 years. CGTN America. https://
america.cgtn.com/2021/03/22/declining-sperm-counts-
around-the-world-could-reach- zero-in-just-24-years
Church–Turing thesis. (2020, August 3). In Wikipedia. https://
en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php? title=Church%E2%80%93Tur
ing_thesis&oldid=970983529
Climate Central. (2019, May 15). POURING IT ON: How Climate
Change Intensifies Heavy Rain Events. https://www.climatecen
tral.org/news/report-pouring-it-on-climate-change-intensi
fies-heavy-rain-events
222 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Cognitive behavioral therapy. (2020, September 29). In Wikipedia.
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php? title=Cognitive_
behavioral_therapy&oldid=980954468
Constructor theory. (2020, August 24). In Wikipedia. https://
en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php? title=Constructor_theory.
Crane, J., & Marchese, K. (2015, September 2). 3D opportunity
for the supply chain: Additive manufacturing delivers. Deloitte
Insights. https://www2.deloitte.com/xe/en/insights/
focus/3d-opportunity/additive- manufacturing-3d-printing-
supply-chain-transformation.html
Cross, H. (2020, June 17). 9 Most Expensive New York City Restau-
rants. TripSavvy. https://www.tripsavvy.com/most-expensive-
new-york-city-restaurants-1613415
Deazley, R. (2004). On the Origin of the Right to Copy: Charting
the Movement of Copyright Law in Eighteenth Century Britain
(1695–1775) (First Edition). Hart Publishing.
Deutsch, D. (2011). The Beginning of Infinity: Explanations That
Transform the World. Viking Adult.
Dickson, S. (2016, August 17). Ten WWII innovations that changed
the world we live in (for the better). The Vintage News. https://
www.thevintagenews.com/2016/08/17/ten-wwii-innovations-
changed-world-live- better/
Discovery doctrine. (2020, September 22). In Wikipedia. https://
en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php? title=Discovery_doctrine&
oldid=979704205
Doyle, A., & Scrutton, A. (2016, April 12). Privacy, what pri-
vacy? Many Nordic tax records are a phone call away. Reuters.
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-panama-tax-nordics-
idUSKCN0X91QE
Dubock, A. (2019). Golden Rice: To Combat Vitamin A Defi-
ciency for Public Health. Vitamin A. Published. https://doi.
org/10.5772/intechopen.84445
Escort fighter. (2021, June 6). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Escort_fighter
Ewers, R. M.,Scharlemann, J. P. W., Balmford, A., & Green, R. E.
REFERENCES 223
(2009). Do increases in agricultural yield spare land for na-
ture? Global Change Biology, 15(7), 1716–1726. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1365- 2486.2009.01849.x
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. (2020). Household Debt and
Credit Report.
https://www.newyorkfed.org/microeconomics/hhdc.html
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. (2021d, August 11). Consumer
Price Index for All Urban Consumers: Durables in U.S. City
Average. FRED. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/CUSR0000
SAD#0
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. (2021b, August 26). Gross Do-
mestic Product. FRED. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/GDP#0
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. (2021a, August 26). Real Me-
dian Household Income in the United States and Gross Domestic
Product. FRED. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/graph/?g=caWq
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. (2021c, June 10). Households
and Nonprofit Organizations; Debt Securities and Loans; Liability,
Level. FRED. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/CMDEBT#0
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. (2021g, March 11). Domestic Fi-
nancial Sectors; Debt Securities and Loans; Liability, Level. FRED.
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/DODFS
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. (2021f, March 11). Nonfinan-
cial Business; Debt Securities and Loans; Liability, Level. FRED.
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/TBSDODNS
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. (2021e, March 25). Gross Out-
put of All Industries. FRED. https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/
GOAI
Fetherston, E., Kinzler, M., & Miller, S. (n.d.). Assembling Our
Transportation Future. Gala. Retrieved August 2, 2021, from
https://www.learngala.com/cases/model-t/8
Flight distance record. (2021, April 7). In Wikipedia. https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flight_distance_record Flint water
crisis. (2021, August 1). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Flint_water_crisis
Fontinelle, A. (2021, February 11). Auto Loan Balances Hit $1.36
224 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Trillion in 2020. Investopedia. https://www.investopedia.com/
personal-finance/american-debt-auto-loan-debt/
Gatto, J. T., Grove, R., Rodriguez, D., Ruenzel, D., & Paul, R.
(2017). The Underground History of American Education, Volume
I: An Intimate Investigation Into the Prison of Modern Schooling.
Valor Academy.
Global Migration Data Portal. (2021, June 3). Environmental
Migration. Migration Data Portal. https://migrationdataportal.
org/themes/environmental_migration_and_statistics
Gold, H. (2017, February 24). Breitbart reveals owners: CEO Larry
Solov, the Mercer family and Susie Breitbart.
Great Firewall. (2020, October 2). In Wikipedia. https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Firewall Hamblin, J. (2016, No-
vember 30). How Cubans Live as Long as Americans at a Tenth
of the Cost. The Atlantic. https://www.theatlantic.com/health/
archive/2016/11/cuba-health/508859/
Harari, Y. N. (2011). Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind.
Penguin Random House
Harding, R. (2020, January 23). Vertical farming finally grows
up in Japan. Financial Times. https://www.ft.com/content/
f80ea9d0-21a8-11ea-b8a1-584213ee7b2b
Harford, B. T. (2017, February 6). Why the falling cost of light
matters. BBC News. https://www.bbc.com/news/business-
38650976
Harrison, M. (1998). The Economics of World War II: Six Great
Powers in International Comparison (Studies in Macroeconomic
History) (Revised ed.). Cambridge University Press. https://
warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/economics/staff/mharrison/public/
ww2overview1998.pdf
Hasell, J. (2013, October 10). Famines. Our World in Data. https://
ourworldindata.org/famines
Haverstock, E. (2020, April 14). Changing FDA rules leave startups
in limbo over at-home COVID-19 tests. PitchBook. https://
pitchbook.com/news/articles/changing-fda-rules-leave-
startups-in-limbo-over-at-home-covid-19-tests
REFERENCES 225
History of patent law. (2020, August 14). In Wikipedia. https://
en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php? title=History_of_patent_
law&oldid=972938791
Holst, A. (2020, December 7). Air conditioners demand worldwide
2012–2018. Statista. https://www.statista.com/statistics/871534/
worldwide-air-conditioner-demand/
How much oxygen does a person consume in a day? (2000, April 1).
HowStuffWorks. https://health.howstuffworks.com/
human-body/systems/respiratory/question98.htm
Hutton, G. (2016, February 12). Can we really put a price on meet-
ing the global targets on drinking-water and sanitation? World
Bank Blogs. https://blogs.worldbank.org/water/can-we-really-
put-price-meeting- global-targets-drinking-water-and-
sanitation
Illumina Next Generation Sequencing. (2021). Science Exchange.
https://www.scienceexchange.com/marketplace/
illumina-ngs?page=1
Inglehart, R., & Norris, P. (2016). Trump, Brexit, and the Rise of
Populism: Economic Have-Nots and Cultural Backlash. SSRN
Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2818659
International Iron and Steel Institute. (1991). Steel statistical
yearbook. Brussels: The Institute. https://www.worldsteel.
org/en/dam/jcr:7cd3de6e-ff49-4731-acc0- 01bb9e8e3773/
Steel%2520statistical%2520yearbook%25201991.pdf
International Iron and Steel Institute. (2001). Steel statistical
yearbook. Brussels: The Institute. https://www.worldsteel.
org/en/dam/jcr:08b20e40-78a2-4971-bcb2- 7a99ee2c7b99/
Steel%2520statistical%2520yearbook%25202001.pdf
Jedlicka, P. (2017, October 24). Revisiting the Quantum Brain
Hypothesis: Toward Quantum (Neuro)biology? Frontiers.
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnmol.2017.
00366/full.
Johnson, S. (2007). The Ghost Map: The Story of London’s Most
Terrifying Epidemic--and How It Changed Science, Cities, and the
Modern World. Riverhead Books.
226 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Johnson, S. (2015, August 19). The Creative Apocalypse That Wasn’t.
The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/23/
magazine/the-creative-apocalypse-that-wasnt.html
Johnson, S. (2021). Extra Life: A Short History of Living Longer.
Riverhead Books.
Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University. (2020).
America’s Rental Housing.
https://www.jchs.harvard.edu/sites/default/files/Harvard_JCHS_
Americas_Rental_Housing_2020.pdf
Juan García (2009) An integrated approach to the design and op-
eration of low capacity sewage treatment works, Desalination
and Water Treatment, 4:1-3, 28-32, DOI: 10.5004/dwt.2009.351
Kahneman, D. (2013). Thinking, Fast and Slow (1st ed.). Farrar,
Straus and Giroux.
Kamal, B. (2017, August 21). Climate Migrants Might Reach One
Billion by 2050. ReliefWeb. https://reliefweb.int/report/world/
climate-migrants-might-reach-one-billion-2050
Kang, C. (2017, April 26). F.C.C. Chairman Pushes Sweeping
Changes to Net Neutrality Rules. The New York Times. https://
www.nytimes.com/2017/04/26/technology/net-neutrality.html
Kaufman, L., Rojanasakul, M., Warren, H., Kao, J., Harris, B.,
& Gopal, P. (2020, June 29). Mapping America’s Under-
water Real Estate. Bloomberg. https://www.bloomberg.
com/tosv2.html? vid=&uuid=3f8d41d0-f6ce-11eb-b60b-
83b18a347fe8&url=L2dyYXBoaWNzLzIwMjAtZmxvb2Qtcml
zay16b25lLXVzLW1hcC8=
Kemp, S. (2020, January). Digital 2020: 3.8 billion people use
social media. We Are Social. https://wearesocial.com/uk/
blog/2020/01/digital-2020-3-8-billion-people-use-social-
media/
Keynes, J. M. (1932). Essays in persuasion. New York: Harcourt,
Brace and Co.
Kilby, E.R. (2007). The demographics of the U.S. equine population.
In D.J. Salem & A.N. Rowan (Eds.), The state of the animals
2007 (pp. 175-205). Washington, DC: Humane Society Press.
REFERENCES 227
Kinsella, S. (2013, December 1). Study: Most Important Innovations
Are Not Patented. The Center for the Study of Innovative
Freedom. http://c4sif.org/2013/11/study-most-important-
innovations-are-not-patented/
Kopp, C. (2021, February 12). Creative Destruction Definition.
Investopedia. https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/
creativedestruction.asp
Krivit, S., & Ravnitzky, M. (2016, December 7). It’s Not Cold
Fusion… But It’s Something. Scientific American Blog Network.
https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/guest-blog/its-not-cold-
fusion-but-its-something/
Lahart, J. (2011, December 10). Number of the Week: Finance’s
Share of Economy Continues to Grow.
WSJ. https://www.wsj.com/articles/BL-REB-15342
Large Hadron Collider. (2021, July 23). In Wikipedia. https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Large_Hadron_Collider
Leonhardt, M. (2020, January 22). 41% of Americans would be able
to cover a $1,000 emergency with savings. CNBC. https://www.
cnbc.com/2020/01/21/41-percent-of-americans-would-be-able-
to-cover-1000- dollar-emergency-with-savings.html
Leontief, W. (1952). MACHINES AND MAN. Scientific American,
187(3), 150-164. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/
stable/24950787
Lepley, S. (2019, May 30). 9 mind-blowing facts about the US farm-
ing industry. Markets.Businessinsider.Com. https://markets.
businessinsider.com/news/stocks/farming-industry-facts-us-
2019-5
Lewis, N. (2018, December 17). The Financial System Should Be
Less Than Half The Size of Today. Forbes. https://www.forbes.
com/sites/nathanlewis/2018/12/17/the-financial-system-
should-be-less-than-half- the-size-of-today/
Liptak, A. (2017, May 22). Supreme Court Ruling Could Hinder
‘Patent Trolls.’ The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.
com/2017/05/22/business/supreme-court-patent-lawsuit.html
List of public corporations by market capitalization. (2020,
228 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
September 1). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.
php? title=List_of_public_corporations_by_market_capital-
ization&oldid=976207594
London sewerage system. (2021, July 24). In Wikipedia. https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/London_sewerage_system
Macguire, B. F. E. C. (2014, October 24). Houses given away for free
in Detroit. CNN. https://edition.cnn.com/2014/10/23/business/
write-a-house-detroit/index.html
Malthus, T. R. (1798). Essay on the Principle of Population.
http://www.esp.org/books/malthus/population/malthus.pdf
Manthorpe, R. (2018, April 17). What is Open Banking and PSD2?
WIRED explains. WIRED UK. https://www.wired.co.uk/article/
open-banking-cma-psd2-explained#:~:text=
Marr, B. (2019, September 5). How Much Data Do We Create Every
Day? The Mind-Blowing Stats Everyone Should Read. Forbes.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2018/05/21/how-
much-data-do- we-create-every-day-the-mind-blowing-stats-
everyone-should-read/
Marx, K. & Engels, F. (1998). The German Ideology, 1845.
Prometheus Books.
McCandless, D. (2020, December 9). World’s Biggest Data
Breaches & Hacks. Information Is Beautiful. https://
informationisbeautiful.net/visualizations/worlds-biggest-
data-breaches-hacks/
McClintock, L. (2020, March 10). How Meditation Changes
the Brain. Psych Central. https://psychcentral.com/blog/
how-meditation-changes-the-brain#1
Mearns, E. (2013, November 3). Energiewende: Germany, UK,
France and Spain. Energy Matters. http://euanmearns.com/
energiewende-germany-uk-france-and-spain/
Michael Faraday. (2021, August 6). In Wikipedia. https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Faraday#Early_life
Military budget of the United States. (2020, September 7). In
Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Military_
budget_of_the_United_States&oldid=977121615
REFERENCES 229
MIMO. (2020, August 29). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.
org/w/index.php?title=MIMO&oldid=975685031
Minimally invasive education. (2021, July 5). In Wikipedia. https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minimally_invasive_education
Mobile Price List In India. (n.d.). 91 Mobiles. Retrieved August 27,
2021, from https://www.91mobiles.com/xiaomi-mobile-price-
list-in-india
Mosse, R. (2015, December 21). The Genesis Engine. Wired. https://
www.wired.com/2015/12/the-genesis- engine/
Motorlease. (n.d.). The Rise of the SUVs. Motorlease Fleet Man-
agement & Leasing Solutions. Retrieved August 7, 2021, from
https://motorlease.com/article/suv-rise/
Motorola DynaTAC. (2021, June 30). In Wikipedia. https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Motorola_DynaTAC
Mullins, R. (2012). What is a Turing machine? University of
Cambridge. https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/projects/raspberrypi/
tutorials/turing-machine/one.html
Napster Settlement Offer Rejected. (2001, March 6). CBS News.
https://www.cbsnews.com/news/napster- settlement-offer-
rejected/
NASA. (2018, December). Journey to Mars: Pioneering Next Steps
in Space Exploration. http://www.nasa.gov/johnson/
exploration/overview/
National Center for Health Statistics. (2019). National Vital
Statistics System. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/
db394-tables-508.pdf#page=1
National Institutes of Health. (2021, August 4). Office of Dietary
Supplements - Omega-3 Fatty Acids. https://ods.od.nih.gov/
factsheets/Omega3FattyAcids-Consumer/
Neuroscience News. (2018, December 3). Man Versus Machine:
Who Wins When It Comes to Facial Recognition? https://neuro
sciencenews.com/man-machine-facial-recognition-120191/
Nipps, K. (2014). Cum privilegio: Licensing of the Press Act of
1662. The Library Quarterly, 84(4), 494–500. https://doi.
org/10.1086/677787
230 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Nordhaus,W. (1994). Do Real Output and Real Wage Measures
Capture Reality? The History of Lighting
Suggests Not, Cowles Foundation Discussion Papers 1078, Cowles
Foundation for Research in Economics, Yale University.
O’Dea, S. (2021, June 2). Smartphone penetration worldwide 2020.
Statista. https://www.statista.com/statistics/203734/
global-smartphone-penetration-per-capita-since-2005/
O’Dell, R., & Penzenstadler, N. (2019, April 4). You elected them to
write new laws. They’re letting corporations do it instead. Cen-
ter for Public Integrity. https://publicintegrity.org/politics/
state-politics/copy- paste-legislate/you-elected-them-to-
write-new-laws-theyre-letting-corporations-do-it-instead/
O’Toole, G. (2011, November 16). “How Will You Get Robots to Pay
Union Dues?” “How Will You Get Robots to Buy Cars?” Quote
Investigator. https://quoteinvestigator.com/2011/11/16/robots-
buy-cars/
OECD (2019)._ Health resources - Pharmaceutical spending._
OECD Data. https://data.oecd.org/healthres/pharmaceutical-
spending.htm
OECD (2020). Details of Tax Revenue - United States. OECD Stats.
https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx? DataSetCode=REVUSA
OECD (2021a), General government spending (indicator). doi:
10.1787/a31cbf4d-en (Accessed on 07 July 2021)
OECD (2021b, July). OECD Statistics - Health expenditure and fi-
nancing. OECD Stat. https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?Theme
TreeId=9
Ord, T. (2020). The Precipice: Existential Risk and the Future of
Humanity. Hachette Books. Orlo Salon. (n.d.). Orlo Salon Price
List. Orlo Salon. http://orlosalon.com/#
Orrall, J. (2020, September 27). Houses 3D-printed in just 24 hours
now shipping in California. CNET. https://www.cnet.com/news/
houses-3d-printed-in-just-24-hours-now-shipping-in-
california/
Our World in Data. (2019). World Population over the last 12,000
years and UN projection until 2100. https://ourworldindata.org/
REFERENCES 231
grapher/world-population-1750-2015-and-un-projection-
until-2100? country=Our+World+In+Data%7EOWID_WRL
Our World in Data. (n.d.). Literate and illiterate world population.
Retrieved August 7, 2021, from https://ourworldindata.org/
grapher/literate-and-illiterate-world-population?country=
%7EOWID_WRL
Paine, T. (1797). Agrarian Justice. London: Paris printed by
W. Adlard, London re-printed for T. Williams Palimpsest.
(2021, June 30). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Palimpsest
Pariser, E. (2021). The Filter Bubble. Penguin Random House.
Parkin, S. (2020, April 2). The Artificially Intelligent Doctor Will
Hear You Now. MIT Technology Review. https://www.techno
logyreview.com/2016/03/09/8890/the-artificially-intelligent-
doctor-will-hear-you-now/
Penicillin. (2021, July 30). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Penicillin#Mass_production
_Personalized Genes. (2015, June 24). _Comparing Price and
Tech. Specs. of Illumina MiSeq, Ion Torrent PGM, 454 GS
Junior, and PacBio RS. http://www.personalizedgenes.com/
comparison-of-illumina-miseq- ion-torrent-pgm-454-gs-
junior-and-pacbio-rs/
Pezzutto, S. (2019). Confucianism and Capitalist Development:
From Max Weber and Orientalism to Lee Kuan Yew and New
Confucianism. Asian Studies Review, 43(2), 224–238. https://doi.
org/10.1080/10357823.2019.1590685
Phillips, P. J et al., (2018). Face recognition accuracy of forensic
examiners, super recognizers, and face recognition algorithms.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(24),
6171–6176. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1721355115
POLITICO. https://www.politico.com/blogs/on-media/2017/02/
breitbart-reveals-owners-ceo-larry-solov- mercer-family-
and-susie-breitrbart-235358
Powers, W., & Roy, D. (2018, March 19). The Incredible Jun: A
Town that Runs on Social Media. Medium. https://medium.
232 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
com/@socialmachines/the-incredible-jun-a-town-that-runs-
on-social-media-49d3d0d4590
Ramankutty, N. et al., (2018). Trends in Global Agricultural Land
Use: Implications for Environmental Health and Food Security.
Annual Review of Plant Biology, 69(1), 789–815. https://doi.
org/10.1146/annurev- arplant-042817-040256
Red flag traffic laws. (2020, July 2). In Wikipedia. https://en.
wikipedia.org/w/index.php? title=Red_flag_traffic_laws&oldid
=965632438
Ritchie, H. (2019, November 13). Land Use. Our World in Data.
https://ourworldindata.org/land-use Ritchie, H., & Roser, M.
(2021, July 1). Sanitation. Our World in Data. https://
ourworldindata.org/sanitation
Rodrick, S. (2019, December 23). All-American Despair. Rolling
Stone. https://www.rollingstone.com/culture/culture-features/
suicide-rate-america-white-men-841576/.
Romine, S. (2019, March 29). Essential Nutrients: What Are They
& How Much Do You Need? Openfit. https://www.openfit.com/
essential-nutrients-explainer
Roser, M. (2013, December 10). Light at Night. Our World in Data.
https://ourworldindata.org/light Roser, M. (2017, December 2).
Fertility Rate. Our World in Data. https://ourworldindata.org/
fertility-rate
Roser, M. (2019a, November). Future Population Growth. Our
World in Data. https://ourworldindata.org/future-population-
growth
Roser, M. (2019b, October). Life Expectancy. Our World in Data.
https://ourworldindata.org/life-expectancy
Roser, M., & Ortiz-Ospina E (2013, May 25). Global Extreme
Poverty. Our World in Data. https://ourworldindata.org/
extreme-poverty
Roser, M., & Ritchie, H. (2013, May 11). Technological Progress. Our
World in Data. https://ourworldindata.org/technological-
progress
Rostad, N. (2018, April). In Mexico, satellite and Wi-Fi come to­gether
REFERENCES 233
to bring internet to remote areas. Viasat. https://www.viasat.
com/about/newsroom/blog/how-satellite-and-wi-fi-come-to-
gether-to-bring-internet-to-remotest-mexico/
Roy, P. (2019, March 18). Mobile data: Why India has the world’s
cheapest. BBC News. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-
india-47537201
S. (2013, October 30). Culture Shock in China - Bathrooms. Chi-
nese Language Blog. https://blogs.transparent.com/chinese/
culture-shock-in-china-bathrooms/
Sample, I. (2018, February 14). Harvard University says it can’t
afford journal publishers’ prices. The Guardian. https://www.
theguardian.com/science/2012/apr/24/harvard-university-
journal-publishers-prices
Seligson, K. (2019, May 20). Misreading the story of climate change
and the Maya. The Conversation. https://theconversation.com/
misreading-the-story-of-climate-change-and-the-maya-113829
Shin, D. D., & Kim, S. I. (2019). Homo Curious: Curious or Inter-
ested? Educational Psychology Review, 31(4), 853–874. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10648-019-09497-x
Shrinivasan, R. (2013, May 1). Farmer population falls by 9 million
in 10 years. The Times of India. https://timesofindia.
indiatimes.com/india/Farmer-population-falls-by-9-million-
in-10- years/articleshow/19813617.cms
Simon, C. (2020, February 28). New clues about how and why the
Maya culture collapsed. Harvard Gazette. https://news.harvard.
edu/gazette/story/2020/02/new-clues-about-how-and-why-
the-maya-culture-collapsed/
Skidelsky, R., & Skidelsky, E. (2013). How Much is Enough?: Money
and the Good Life. Other Press.
Slaton, J. (1999, January 13). A Mickey Mouse Copyright Law?
Wired. https://www.wired.com/1999/01/a- mickey-mouse-
copyright-law/
Slotta, D. (2020, November 26). Number of newly built apartments
in China 2009–2019. Statista. https://www.statista.com/
statistics/242963/number-of-newly-built-apartments-in-china/
234 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Smith, D. (2020, August 27). Despite Streaming, US Recorded Music
Revenues Still Down 50% From 1999 Peaks. Digital Music News.
https://www.digitalmusicnews.com/2020/08/27/recorded-
music-revenues- decrease/
Smog kills thousands in England. (2020, December 4). HISTORY.
https://www.history.com/this-day-in- history/smog-kills-
thousands-in-england
Solar wind. (2021, July 18). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Solar_wind#Atmospheres
Sony Music - Overview, News & Competitors. (n.d.). ZoomInfo.
https://www.zoominfo.com/c/sony-music- entertainment/
253920496
Statista. (2020, December 3). Number of mobile subscriptions
worldwide 1993–2019. https://www.statista.com/statistics/
262950/global-mobile-subscriptions-since-1993/
Statista. (2021a, February 2). Global module manufacturing produc-
tion 2000–2019.
https://www.statista.com/statistics/668764/annual-solar-module-
manufacturing-globally/
Statista. (2021b, May 10). Smartphone penetration rate in India FY
2016–2020, with estimates until 2025.
https://www.statista.com/statistics/1229799/india-smartphone-
penetration-rate/
Steven W. Henderson, “Consumer spending in World War II: the
forgotten consumer expenditure surveys,”
Monthly Labor Review, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, August
2015, https://doi.org/10.21916/mlr.2015.29.
Stoller, M. (2020, April 9). The Cantillon Effect: Why Wall Street
Gets a Bailout and You Don’t. BIG by Matt Stoller. https://
mattstoller.substack.com/p/the-cantillon-effect-why-wall-street
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
(2020). Key substance use and mental health indicators in the
United States: Results from the 2019 National Survey on Drug Use
and Health (HHS Publication No. PEP20-07-01-001, NSDUH
Series H-55). Rockville, MD: Center for Behavioral Health
REFERENCES 235
Statistics and Quality, Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration. Retrieved from https://www.samhsa.
gov/data/
Suicide statistics. (2019, November 15). American Foundation for
Suicide Prevention. https://afsp.org/suicide-statistics/
Szalavitz, M. (2017, June 14). Why Disappointment Is So Devas-
tating: Dopamine, Addiction, and the Hedonic Treadmill. Pacific
Standard. https://psmag.com/news/why-disappointment-
is-so-devastating- dopamine-addiction-and-the-hedonic-
treadmill
The American Academy of Actuaries. (2018, March). Prescrip-
tion Drug Spending in the U.S. Health Care System. American
Academy of Actuaries. https://www.actuary.org/content/
prescription-drug-spending-us- health-care-system
The Economist. (2016, January 28). Machine earning. https://
www.economist.com/finance-and- economics/2016/01/28/
machine-earning
The Nielsen Total Audience Report. (2020, August 13). Nielsen.
https://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/report/2020/the-
nielsen-total-audience-report-august- 2020/#popupForm
The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. (n.d.).
When You Ride Alone You Ride With Hitler! National Archives.
Retrieved August 2, 2021, from https://www.archives.gov/
exhibits/powers_of_persuasion/use_it_up/images_html/ride_
with_hitler.html
Tim Berners-Lee. (n.d.). W3C. https://www.w3.org/People/Berners-
Lee/
Timpson, Christopher G. “Quantum Computers: The
Church-Turing Hypothesis Versus the Turing Principle.” Alan
Turing: Life and Legacy of a Great Thinker, Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2004, pp. 213–40, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
662-05642-4_9.
Twomey, C., & O’Reilly, G. (2017). Associations of Self-Pre-
sentation on Facebook with Mental Health and Personality
Variables: A Systematic Review. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and
236 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Social Networking, 20(10), 587–595. https://doi.org/10.1089/
cyber.2017.0247
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. (2020, February). Gross Do-
mestic Product, Fourth Quarter and Year 2019 (Second Esti-
mate), U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). https://www.
bea.gov/news/2020/gross-domestic-product-fourth-quarter-
and-year-2019-second-estimate
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract of the United
States: 1949_. (Seventh edition.) Washington, D.C., https://
www.census.gov/library/publications/1949/compendia/
statab/70ed.html
U.S. Census Bureau. (2019, July). U.S. Census Bureau QuickFacts:
United States. Census Bureau Quick Facts. https://www.census.
gov/quickfacts/fact/table/US/PST045219
U.S. Copyright Office. (2019, December). Circular 1: Copyright
Basics,” U.S. Copyright Office.
https://www.copyright.gov/circs/circ01.pdf.
U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services. (2015, December). 2015-2020 Dietary
Guidelines for Americans (8th Edition) https://health.gov/sites/
default/files/2019-09/2015- 2020_Dietary_Guidelines.pdf
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). (2021, July 2).
Aluminum: Material-Specific Data. US EPA. https://www.epa.
gov/facts-and-figures-about-materials-waste-and-recycling/
aluminum-material-specific-data
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) & The
Global Alliance for Buildings and Construction (GABC).
(2017, November). Towards zero-emission efficient and resilient
buildings - Global Status Report 2016. United Nations Envi-
ronment Programme. https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/
handle/20.500.11822/10618/GABC-Report_Updated.pdf?
sequence=1&%3BisAllowed=
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
Population Division (2019). World Population Prospects 2019,
Online Edition. Rev. 1.
REFERENCES 237
Universal Music - Overview, News & Competitors. (n.d.). ZoomInfo.
https://www.zoominfo.com/c/universal- music-group/
122060886
Unschooling. (2021, August 5). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Unschooling
Urmson, C. (2012, August 7). The self-driving car logs more miles on
new wheels. Official Google Blog. https://googleblog.blogspot.
com/2012/08/the-self-driving-car-logs-more-miles-on.html
USDA. (n.d.)._ USDA ERS - Ag and Food Sectors and the Econ-
omy. U.S Department of Agriculture._ Retrieved August 4,
2021, from https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/ag-and-
food-statistics-charting-the- essentials/ag-and-food-sectors-
and-the-economy/
Van Alstyne, M. & Brynjolfsson, E. (2005). Global Village or
Cyber-Balkans? Modeling and Measuring the Integration of
Electronic Communities. Management Science Vol. 51, No. 6,
851-868. https://www.jstor.org/stable/20110380
Vincent, J. (2016, February 8). Facebook’s Free Basics service
has been banned in India. The Verge. https://www.theverge.
com/2016/2/8/10913398/free-basics-india-regulator-ruling
Vosoughi, S., Roy, D., & Aral, S. (2018). The spread of true and
false news online. Science, 359(6380), 1146–1151. https://doi.
org/10.1126/science.aap9559
Warner Music Group - Company Profile and News, (n.d.). Bloomberg.
https://www.bloomberg.com/profile/company/WMG:US
Water: How much should you drink every day? (2020, October 14).
Mayo Clinic. https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/
nutrition-and-healthy-eating/in-depth/water/art-20044256?
reDate=06052021
Wenger, A. (2011, October 3). Needed: The Opposing View Reader.
Continuations by Albert Wenger. https://continuations.com/
post/10979468250/needed-the-opposing-view-reader
Wenger, A. (2012, January 26). Supermodularity And Service Bun-
dling. Continuations by Albert Wenger. https://continuations.
com/post/16473794320/supermodularity-and-service-bundling
238 THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Wenger, A. (2017a, July 31). VPNs and Informational Freedom.
Continuations by Albert Wenger. https://continuations.com/
post/163632347545/vpns-and-informational-freedom
Wenger, A. (2017b, March 24). Government Just Gave Your ISP
Even More Power: You Can Take it Back! Continuations by
Albert Wenger. https://continuations.com/post/158773876945/
yesterday-the-republican- controlled-senate-voted#=
White, A. (2021, May 4). Credit card debt in the U.S. hits all-time
high of $930 billion—here’s how to tackle yours with a balance
transfer. CNBC. https://www.cnbc.com/select/us-credit-card-
debt-hits-all-time-high/
White, R. (2019, October 7). Ancient Maya Canals and Fields Show
Early and Extensive Impacts on Tropical Forests. UT News.
https://news.utexas.edu/2019/10/07/ancient-maya-canals-
and-fields-show-early- and-extensive-impacts-on-tropical-
forests/
Whitford, E. (2015, September 10). Judge: Uber’s E-Hails Are Legal,
Taxi Industry Must Be “Wary.”
Gothamist. https://gothamist.com/news/judge-ubers-e-hails-are-
legal-taxi-industry-must-be-wary
Willyard, C. (2019, December 20). Lyme Vaccines Show New Prom-
ise, and Face Old Challenges. Undark Magazine. https://undark.
org/2019/10/02/new-landscape-lyme-vaccines/
Wong, J. I. (2016, April 7). A fleet of trucks just drove themselves
across Europe. Quartz. https://qz.com/656104/a-fleet-of-trucks-
just-drove-themselves-across-europe/
World Bank. (2020a). GDP per capita, PPP. World Bank – World
Development Indicators. https://data.worldbank.org/
indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.CD
World Bank. (2020c). Gross capital formation. World Bank –
World Development Indicators. https://data.worldbank.org/
indicator/NE.GDI.TOTL.KD
World Bank. (2020b). Mortality rate, under-5. World Bank – World
Development Indicators. https://data.worldbank.org/
indicator/SH.DYN.MORT
REFERENCES 239
World Health Organization. (n.d.). Air pollution. https://www.who.
int/health-topics/air-pollution#tab=tab_1
World Population Clock: 7.9 Billion People (2021) - Worldome-
ter. (n.d.). World Meters. https://www.worldometers.info/
world-population/
World Steel Association. (2021, January 26). Global crude steel
output decreases by 0.9% in 2020. World Steel. https://www.
worldsteel.org/media-centre/press-releases/2021/Global-
crude-steel-output-decreases- by-0.9--in-2020.html
Worldsteel Committee on Economic Studies. (2011). Steel Statisti-
cal Yearbook 2011. World Steel Association. https://www.world-
steel.org/en/dam/jcr:c12843e8-49c3-40f1-92f1- 9665dc3f7a35/
Steel%2520statistical%2520yearbook%25202011.pdf
Wright brothers. (2020, August 25). In Wikipedia.https://
en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php? title=Wright_brothers&ol-
did=974902146
Wulstan, D. (1971). The Earliest Musical Notation. Music & Letters,
52(4), 365-382. Retrieved May 8, 2021, from http://www.jstor.
org/stable/734711
Xue, L. (2019, October 11). Hainan Bans All Fossil Fuel Vehicles.
What Does it Mean for Clean Transport in China? TheCityFix.
https://thecityfix.com/blog/hainan-bans-fossil-fuel-vehicles-
mean-clean-transport-china- lulu-xue/
Yoon, Y. B., Bae, D., Kwak, S., Hwang, W. J., Cho, K. I. K., Lim, K.
O., Park, H. Y., Lee, T. Y., Kim, S. N., &
Kwon, J. S. (2019). Plastic Changes in the White Matter In-
duced by Templestay, a 4-Day Intensive Mindfulness Med-
itation Program. Mindfulness, 10(11), 2294–2301. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12671-019- 01199-3
Zorabedian, J. (2015, July 17). Why this doctor posted his medi-
cal history online for anyone to see. Naked Security. https://nakedsecurity.sophos.com/2015/07/17/why-this-doctor-posted-
his-medical-history-online- for-anyone-to-see/
THE WORLD AFTER CAPITAL
Copyright © 2021 by Albert Wenger
Contents licensed under
Creative Commons Attribution – Non Commercial – Share Alike,
for more please see worldaftercapital.org
Published by Albert Wenger
@albertwenger
continuations.com
Concept and Layout:
Looping Group, Munich, Germany
ISBN 978-0-578-31745-8
First Edition: December 2021
Printed in Germany
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1